news: release 0.6.0 (#235)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/news/2022-01-06-bevy-0.6/index.md

+++
title = "Bevy 0.6"
date = 2022-01-06
[extra]
author = "Carter Anderson"
twitter = "cart_cart"
github = "cart"
youtube = "cartdev"
image = "bistro_night.png"
show_image = true
image_subtitle = "The Lumberyard Bistro scene rendered in the New Bevy Renderer by @mockersf"
image_subtitle_link = ""
+++

Thanks to **X** contributors, **X** pull requests, and our [**generous sponsors**](https://github.com/sponsors/cart), I'm happy to announce the **Bevy 0.6** release on [crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/bevy)!

For those who don't know, Bevy is a refreshingly simple data-driven game engine built in Rust. You can check out [Quick Start Guide](/learn/book/getting-started/) to get started. Bevy is also free and open source forever! You can grab the full [source code](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy) on GitHub. Check out [Bevy Assets](https://bevyengine.org/assets) for a collection of community-developed plugins, games, and learning resources.

To update an existing Bevy App or Plugin to **Bevy 0.6**, check out our [0.5 to 0.6 Migration Guide](/learn/book/migration-guides/0.5-0.6/).

> There are a _ton_ of improvements in this release, but here are some of the big ones: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a _ton_ of improvements, bug fixes and quality of life tweaks in this release; here are some of the highlights: 
```

More punch! Less apologetic! Focusing on "we care about the little stuff too" is an important signal of quality.

Author: Small style thing: I swapped out the semicolon for a period. I rarely use them :)

* A brand new modern renderer that is prettier, faster, and easier to extend
* Directional and point light shadows
* Clustered forward rendering
* Frustum culling
* Significantly faster sprite rendering with less boilerplate
* Native WebGL2 support
* High level custom Materials
* More powerful shaders: preprocessors, imports, WGSL support
* Bevy ECS ergonomics and performance improvements. No more `.system()`!

Read on for details!

<!-- more -->

## The New Bevy Renderer

**Bevy 0.6** introduces a brand new modern renderer that is:

> * **Faster**: More parallel, less computation per-entity, more efficient CPU->GPU dataflow, and (soon-to-be-enabled) pipelined rendering

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Faster**: More parallel, less computation per-entity, more efficient CPU->GPU dataflow, and (with soon-to-be-enabled) pipelined rendering
```

* **Simpler**: Fewer layers of abstraction, simpler data flow, improved low-level, mid-level, and high-level interfaces, direct wgpu access 
* **Modular to its core**: Standardized 2d and 3d core pipelines, extensible Render Phases and Views, composable entity/component-driven draw functions, shader imports, extensible and repeatable render pipelines via "sub graphs"

> * **Prettier**: We're releasing the new renderer alongside a number of graphical improvements, such as directional and point light shadows, clustered forward rendering (so you can draw more lights in a scene), and spherical area lights. We also have a ton of new features in development (cascaded shadow maps, bloom, particles, shadow filters, and more!)

Author: I dig it! I chose not to add credits to this section because I think it distracts from the "snappyness" of the messaging (note that I didn't credit myself here either ... I just used "we"). Rob gets ample credits in the rest of the blog post. I don't think that message will be lost.

> * **Industry Proven**: It takes inspiration from battle tested renderer architectures, such as [Bungie's pipelined Destiny renderer](https://advances.realtimerendering.com/destiny/gdc_2015/Tatarchuk_GDC_2015__Destiny_Renderer_web.pdf). We also learned a lot from (and worked closely with) other renderer developers in the Rust space, namely @aclysma ([rafx](https://github.com/aclysma/rafx)) and @cwfitzgerald ([rend3](https://github.com/BVE-Reborn/rend3)). The New Bevy Renderer wouldn't be what it is without them and I highly recommend checking out their projects!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Industry Proven**: We've taken inspiration from battle tested renderer architectures, such as [Bungie's pipelined Destiny renderer](https://advances.realtimerendering.com/destiny/gdc_2015/Tatarchuk_GDC_2015__Destiny_Renderer_web.pdf). We also learned a lot from (and worked closely with) other renderer developers in the Rust space, namely @aclysma ([rafx](https://github.com/aclysma/rafx)) and @cwfitzgerald ([rend3](https://github.com/BVE-Reborn/rend3)). The New Bevy Renderer wouldn't be what it is without them and I highly recommend checking out their projects!
```

Flow.

> I promise I'll qualify all of those fluffy buzz words below. I am confident that the New Bevy Renderer will be a rallying point for the Bevy graphics ecosystem and (hopefully) the Rust graphics ecosystem at large. We still have _plenty_ of work to do, but I'm proud of what we have accomplished so far and I'm excited for the future!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I promise I'll qualify all of those fluffy buzzwords below. We still have _plenty_ of work to do, but I'm proud of what we've built so far and excited for the future!
```

"buzzword" is one word. Editing for brevity.

Reviewer 2: I felt the removed sentence was important and valuable as it highlights community value and would prefer not to remove it. :) I have a strong feeling of collaboration around rendering things with various people in the Rust space and that has been cultivated or has come to the fore perhaps primarily during this release.

Author: Yeah I think I'll just throw in the buzzword fix. I like the current phrasing.

![bistro day](bistro_day.png)

### Why build a new renderer?

Before we cover whats new, its worth discussing why we embarked on such a massive effort. The old Bevy Renderer got a number of things right:
* **Modular render logic** (via the Render Graph)
* **Multiple backends** (both first and third party)
* **High level data-driven api**: this made it easy and ergonomic to write custom per-entity render logic

However it also had a number of _significant_ shortcomings:

> * **Complex**: The "high level ease of use" came at the cost of significant implementation complexity, performance overhead, and invented jargon. Users were often overwhelmed when trying to operate at any level but "high level".

Author: I don't want to directly qualify these terms right away as I think it gets "into the weeds" too early.  I just added a note in the "embracing wgpu" section that wgpu is our "low level" api (because we never explicitly tied those terms together). I _think_ thats probably good enough, but if you have specific ideas about how to better introduce them without complicating things too early, let me know!

* **Often slow**: Features like "sprite rendering" were built on the costly high level abstractions mentioned above. Performance was ... suboptimal when compared to other options in the ecosystem.

> * **Renderer complexity in userspace**: It stored a lot of internal render state on each entity. This took up space, computing the state was expensive, and it gunked up userspace with a bunch of "do not touch" render state. This state (or at least, the component metadata) needed to be written to / read from Scenes, which was also suboptimal and error prone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Do Not Touch state**: It stored a lot of internal render state on each entity. This took up space, computing the state was expensive, and it gunked up the publicly-visible component lists with a bunch of "do not touch" rendering components. This state (or at least, the component metadata) needed to be written to / read from Scenes, which was also suboptimal and error prone.
```

Suggested renaming.

> * **Renderer complexity in userspace**: It stored a lot of internal render state on each entity. This took up space, computing the state was expensive, and it gunked up userspace with a bunch of "do not touch" render state. This state (or at least, the component metadata) needed to be written to / read from Scenes, which was also suboptimal and error prone.

Author: Yes and no. Given that visibility is a thing that happens in the "user's app" (and will be useful to app logic in some cases), I consider these things to be less "gunky" than things like the Draw or RenderResources components, which have a clearer separation of concerns.

> * **Renderer complexity in userspace**: It stored a lot of internal render state on each entity. This took up space, computing the state was expensive, and it gunked up userspace with a bunch of "do not touch" render state. This state (or at least, the component metadata) needed to be written to / read from Scenes, which was also suboptimal and error prone.

Author: Fair point. "Do not touch state" felt a bit awkward as an "opening line", so I rephrased it as "User-facing internals"

* **Repeating render logic was troublesome**: Viewports, rendering to multiple textures / windows, and shadow maps were possible, but they required hard-coding, special casing, and boilerplate. This wasn't aligned with our goals for modularity and clarity.

### Why now?

> The shortcomings above were acceptable in Bevy's early days, but were clearly holding us back as Bevy grew from a [one person side project](bevyengine.org/news/introducing-bevy) to the most popular Rust game engine on Github (and nearly the most [popular open source game engine ... period](https://github.com/topics/game-engine)). A "passable" renderer no longer cuts it when we have hundreds of contributors, a paid full time developer, thousands of individual users, and a growing number of companies paying people to work on Bevy apps and features. It was time for a change.

Reviewer 3: That is, talking about <https://github.com/topics/game-engine>. I do notice that <https://github.com/leereilly/games> could reasonably not be called a game engine, which would make us 5th.

> The shortcomings above were acceptable in Bevy's early days, but were clearly holding us back as Bevy grew from a [one person side project](bevyengine.org/news/introducing-bevy) to the most popular Rust game engine on Github (and nearly the most [popular open source game engine ... period](https://github.com/topics/game-engine)). A "passable" renderer no longer cuts it when we have hundreds of contributors, a paid full time developer, thousands of individual users, and a growing number of companies paying people to work on Bevy apps and features. It was time for a change.

Author: Yeah "nearly the most" is pushing it in a way I wasn't really considering. "one of the most" seems like more accurate phrasing.

> The shortcomings above were acceptable in Bevy's early days, but were clearly holding us back as Bevy grew from a [one person side project](bevyengine.org/news/introducing-bevy) to the most popular Rust game engine on Github (and nearly the most [popular open source game engine ... period](https://github.com/topics/game-engine)). A "passable" renderer no longer cuts it when we have hundreds of contributors, a paid full time developer, thousands of individual users, and a growing number of companies paying people to work on Bevy apps and features. It was time for a change.

Reviewer 3: I don't think the 'period' makes sense there after this suggestion

> The shortcomings above were acceptable in Bevy's early days, but were clearly holding us back as Bevy grew from a [one person side project](bevyengine.org/news/introducing-bevy) to the most popular Rust game engine on Github (and nearly the most [popular open source game engine ... period](https://github.com/topics/game-engine)). A "passable" renderer no longer cuts it when we have hundreds of contributors, a paid full time developer, thousands of individual users, and a growing number of companies paying people to work on Bevy apps and features. It was time for a change.

Author: Agreed. "one of the most" instead of "nearly" is way more accurate.

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart</div>

Pipelined Rendering is a cornerstone of the new renderer. It accomplishes a number of goals:

* **Increased Parallelism**: We can now start processing the next frame while rendering the current frame. Given that rendering is often a bottleneck, this can be a huge win when there is also a lot of app work to do.
* **Clearer Dataflow and Structure**: Pipelining requires drawing hard lines between "app logic" and "render logic", with a fixed synchronization point (which we call the "extract" step). This makes it easier to reason about dataflow and ownership. Code can be organized along these lines, which improves clarity.

From a high level, traditional "non-pipelined rendering" looks like this:

![non-pipelined rendering](unpipelined_rendering.png)

Pipelined rendering looks like this:

![pipelined rendering](pipelined_rendering.png)

Much better!

Bevy apps are now split into the Main App, which is where app logic occurs, and the Render App, which has its own separate ECS World and Schedule. The Render App consists of the following ECS stages, which developers add ECS Systems to when they are composing new render features:

> * **Extract**: This is the one synchronization point between the App World and the Render World. Relevant Entities, Components, and Resources are read from the App World and written to corresponding Entities, Components, and Resources in the Render World. The goal is to keep this step as quick as possible, as it is the one piece of logic that cannot run in parallel. It is a good rule of thumb to only extract "visible" data that contributes to the rendered frame.

Author: My take is that its probably too much complexity for the introduction. Something to cover at the beginning of the renderer docs, but I hesitate to add more details to an already "complex" body of text.

### Render Graphs and Sub Graphs

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart</div>

![render graph](render_graph.svg)

The New Bevy Renderer has a Render Graph, [much like the old Bevy renderer](/news/introducing-bevy/#render-graph). Render Graphs are a way to logically model GPU command construction in a modular way. Graph Nodes pass GPU resources like Textures and Buffers (and sometimes Entities) to each other, forming a directed acyclic graph. When a Graph Node runs, it uses its graph inputs and the Render World to construct GPU command lists.

The biggest change to this API is that we now support Sub Graphs, which are basically "namespaced" Render Graphs that can be run from any Node in the graph with arbitrary inputs. This enables us to define things like a "2d" and "3d" sub graph, which users can insert custom logic into. This opens two doors simultaneously:

> * Ability to repeat render logic, but for different views (split screen, mirrors, rendering to a texture, shadow maps)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the ability to repeat render logic, but for different views (split screen, mirrors, rendering to a texture, shadow maps)
```

Reviewer 4: nit: needs period/semicolon

> * Ability for users to extend this repeated logic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the ability for users to extend this repeated logic, customizing the renderer to enable their unique artistic vision
```

Reviewer 4: nit: needs period.

### Embracing WGPU

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart</div>

Bevy has always used [WGPU](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu), a native GPU abstraction layer with support for most graphics backends: Vulkan, Metal, DX12, OpenGL, WebGL2, and WebGPU (and WIP DX11 support). But the old renderer hid it behind our own hardware abstraction layer. In practice, this was largely just a mirror of the WGPU api. It gave us the ability to build own our graphics backends without bothering the WGPU folks, but in practice it created a lot of pain (due to being an imperfect mirror), overhead (due to introducing a dynamic api and requiring global mutex locks over gpu resource collections), and complexity (bevy_render -> wgpu -> Vulkan). In return, we didn't get many practical benefits ... just slightly more autonomy.

> The truth of the matter is that WGPU already occupies _exactly_ the space we want it to:

Reviewer: There was another usage above. I'm not sure I agree with this change: the caps help make it clear that it's a proper noun.

If you adopt this, I'd probably like code block formatting to make sure that stays clear.

> The truth of the matter is that WGPU already occupies _exactly_ the space we want it to:

Author: I think the rationale here (which i agree with) is that we should refer to them the way they refer to themselves (lowercase). I also hesitate to make wgpu a code block, given how prevalent it is.

> The truth of the matter is that WGPU already occupies _exactly_ the space we want it to:

Reviewer 2: I was also thinking about some kind of emphasis to make the lower case stand out a little more. I don’t know. But indeed it was about how they refer to themselves.

* Multiple backends, with the goal to support as many platforms as possible
* A "baseline" feature set that works almost everywhere with a consistent api
* A "limits" and "features" system that enables opting in to arbitrary (sometimes backend-specific features) and detecting when those features are available. This will be important when we start adding things like raytracing and VR support.
* A modern GPU api, but without the pain and complexity of raw Vulkan. Perfect for user-facing Bevy renderer extensions.

However initially there were a couple of reasons not to make it our "public facing api":

> * **Complexity**: WGPU used to be built on top of gfx-hal (on older GPU abstraction layer also built and managed by the WGPU team). These multiple layers of abstraction in multiple repos made contributing to and reasoning about the internals difficult.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **Complexity**: WGPU used to be built on top of gfx-hal (an older GPU abstraction layer also built and managed by the WGPU team). These multiple layers of abstraction in multiple repos made contributing to and reasoning about the internals difficult.
```

* **Licensing**: WGPU used to be licensed under the "copyleft" MPL license, which created concerns about integration with proprietary graphics apis (such as consoles like the Switch).

> * **WebGL2 Support**: WGPU used to not have a WebGL2 backend. Bevy's old renderer had a custom WebGL2 backend and we weren't willing to give the Web platform up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **WebGL2 Support**: WGPU used to not have a WebGL2 backend. Bevy's old renderer had a custom WebGL2 backend and we weren't willing to give up support for the Web as a platform.
```

> _Almost immediately_ after we voiced these concerns, @kvark kicked off a [relicensing effort](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/issues/392) that switched WGPU to the Rust-standard dual MIT/Apache-2.0 license. They also removed gfx-hal in favor of a [much simpler and flatter architecture](https://gfx-rs.github.io/2021/08/18/release-0.10.html). Soon after, @zicklag [added a WebGL2 backend](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/pull/1686). Having resolved all of my remaining hangups, it was clear to me that @kvark's priorities were aligned with mine and that I could trust them to adjust to feedback. And now that WGPU has a flatter architecture, I feel more comfortable forking and maintaining it under the Bevy umbrella if that ever becomes necessary. But I doubt we will ever need to ... WGPU has proven to be a responsive partner and I'm very comfortable letting @kvark own this area, given his expertise.

Author: Good call. I intentionally use gender-neutral pronouns wherever possible (unless specifically asked to do otherwise by individuals). I'll change this to "their".

The New Bevy Renderer tosses out our old intermediate GPU abstraction layer in favor of using WGPU directly. The result is a simpler (and faster) architecture with full and direct access to WGPU. Feedback from Bevy Renderer feature developers so far has been _very positive_.

> Bevy was also updated to use the latest and greatest WGPU version: 0.12.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bevy was also updated to use the latest and greatest WGPU version: [0.12](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#wgpu-012-2021-12-18).
```

> ### ECS Driven Rendering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### ECS-Driven Rendering
```

Bevy's built in render features build on top of the Core Pipeline (ex: `bevy_sprite` and `bevy_pbr`). The Core Pipeline will continue to expand with things like a standardized "post processing" effect stack.

### Materials

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart</div>

The new renderer structure gives developers fine grained control over how entities are drawn. Developers can manually define Extract, Prepare, and Queue systems to draw entities using arbitrary render commands in custom or built in {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_core_pipeline" version="0.6.0" name="RenderPhase" plural=true)}}. However this level of control necessitates understanding the render pipeline internals and involve more boilerplate than most users are willing to tolerate. Sometimes all you want to do is slot your custom material shader into the existing pipelines!

> The new {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="Material")}} trait enables users to ignore nitty gritty details in favor of a simpler interface: just implement the {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="Material")}} trait and add a {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="MaterialPlugin")}} for your type. The new [shader_material.rs](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.6.0/examples/shader/shader_material.rs) example illustrates this.

Reviewer: It's a struct, which accepts a generic type argument with a `Material` bound: https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/963e2f08a2f762d896eb28ef4a80ba2ec124655b/crates/bevy_pbr/src/material.rs#L172

So this link will be broken.

> The new {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="Material")}} trait enables users to ignore nitty gritty details in favor of a simpler interface: just implement the {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="Material")}} trait and add a {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="MaterialPlugin")}} for your type. The new [shader_material.rs](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.6.0/examples/shader/shader_material.rs) example illustrates this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="Material")}} trait enables users to ignore nitty gritty details in favor of a simpler interface: just implement the {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="Material")}} trait and add a {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="MaterialPlugin")}} for your type. The new [shader_material.rs](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.6.0/examples/shader/shader_material.rs) example illustrates this.
```

    }

    fn bind_group(render_asset: &<Self as RenderAsset>::PreparedAsset) -> &BindGroup {
        /* return bind group here */
    }

    fn bind_group_layout(render_device: &RenderDevice) -> BindGroupLayout {
        /* return bind group layout here */
    }
}
```

There is also a {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="SpecializedMaterial")}} variant, which enables "specializing" shaders and pipelines using custom per-entity keys. This extra flexibility isn't always needed, but when you need it, you will be glad to have it!

We also have big plans to make {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="Material" plural=true)}} even better:
* **Bind Group derives**: this should cut down on the boilerplate of passing materials to the GPU.
* **Material Instancing**: materials enable us to implement high level mesh instancing as a simple configuration item for both built in and custom materials.

### Visibility and Frustum Culling

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

[![view frustum](ViewFrustum.svg)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viewing_frustum#/media/File:ViewFrustum.svg)

> Drawing things is expensive! It requires writing data from the CPU to the GPU, constructing draw calls, and running shaders. We can save a lot of time by _not_ drawing things that the camera can't see. "Frustum culling" is the act of not drawing objects that are outside of the bounds of the camera's view frustum. For large scenes, this can be the difference between a crisp 60 frames per second and chugging to a grinding halt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Drawing things is expensive! It requires writing data from the CPU to the GPU, constructing draw calls, and running shaders. We can save a lot of time by _not_ drawing things that the camera can't see. "Frustum culling" is the act of excluding objects that are outside of the bounds of the camera's "view frustum", to avoid wasting work drawing them. For large scenes, this can be the difference between a crisp 60 frames per second and chugging to a grinding halt.
```

An act of not doing things is confusing.

> **Bevy 0.6** now automatically does frustum culling for 3d objects using their bounding boxes. We might also enable this for 2d objects in future releases, but the wins there will be less pronounced, as drawing sprites is now much cheaper thanks to the new batched rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Bevy 0.6** now automatically does frustum culling for 3d objects using their axis-aligned bounding boxes. We might also enable this for 2d objects in future releases, but the wins there will be less pronounced, as drawing sprites is now much cheaper thanks to the new batched rendering.
```

OBB is another reasonable choice, so we should specify.

commands.entity(entity).insert(NotShadowCaster);
```

Likewise they can opt out of receiving shadows by adding the {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="NotShadowReceiver")}} component.

```rust
commands.entity(entity).insert(NotShadowReceiver);
```

### Spherical Area Lights

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Josh015</div>

`PointLight` Components can now define a `radius` value, which controls the size of the sphere that emits light. A normal zero-sized "point light" has a radius of zero.

![spherical area lights](spherical_area_lights.png)

(Note that lights with a radius don't normally take up physical space in the world ... I added meshes to help illustrate light position and size)

### Configurable Alpha Blend Modes

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

Bevy's StandardMaterial now has a `blend_mode` field, which can be set to `AlphaMode::Opaque`, `AlphaMode::Mask(f32)`, or `AlphaMode::Blend`. This field is properly set when loading GLTF scenes.

![alpha blend modes](alpha_blend.png)

### Clustered Forward Rendering 

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

> Modern scenes often have many point lights. But when rendering scenes with hundreds of lights, calculating lighting for each light, for each rendered fragment can be prohibitively expensive. Clustered Forward Rendering is a popular approach that increases the number of lights you can have in a scene by dividing up the view frustum into "clusters". Each cluster is then assigned lights based on whether or not they can affect that cluster. This is a form of "culling" that enables fragments to ignore lights that aren't assigned to their cluster.

Reviewer: Do we have a good link to some reading on CFR? This seems like the sort of topic that would be interesting to dig into for some of the audience.

Author: Added the best link I have!

    commands.spawn_bundle(SpriteBundle {
        material: materials.add(texture_handle.into()),
        ..Default::default()
    });
}

// New (Bevy 0.6)
fn spawn_sprite(mut commands: Commands, asset_server: Res<AssetServer>) {
    commands.spawn_bundle(SpriteBundle {
        texture: asset_server.load("player.png"),
        ..Default::default()
    });
}
```

No need to manage sprite materials! Their texture handle is now a direct component and color can now be set directly on the {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_sprite" version="0.6.0" name="Sprite")}} component.

### WGSL Shaders

Bevy now uses [WGSL](https://www.w3.org/TR/WGSL/) for our built-in shaders and examples. WGSL is a new shader language being developed for WebGPU (although it is a "cross platform" shader language just like GLSL). Bevy still supports GLSL shaders, but WGSL is nice enough that, for now, we are treating it as our "officially recommended" shader language. WGSL is still being developed and polished, but given how much investment it is receiving I believe it is worth betting on. Consider this the start of the "official Bevy shader language" conversation, not the end of it.

> ```rust

Author: Yeah ultimately we should contribute WGSL support to Zola :)

[[group(0), binding(0)]]
var<uniform> view: View;

[[group(1), binding(0)]]
var<uniform> mesh: Mesh;

struct Vertex {
    [[location(0)]] position: vec3<f32>;
};

struct VertexOutput {
    [[builtin(position)]] clip_position: vec4<f32>;
};

[[stage(vertex)]]

> fn vertex(vertex: Vertex) -> VertexOutput {

Author: Hmm on the one hand ... I see you point. On the other hand: "vertex" and "fragment" are the common "non-main" conventions for those shader functions. The type of the input to the vertex function is a Vertex. The variable name for something of type `Vertex` should be `vertex`. WGSL requires the `[[stage(vertex)]]` annotation. Some of those things we don't have power over, and the ones we do I wouldn't want to change. Maybe we can ultimately find a way to omit the "stage(vertex)" annotation?

In the short term, maybe it would be better to do a fragment shader for the example.

> fn vertex(vertex: Vertex) -> VertexOutput {

Reviewer 4: I don't want to push that hard on this because it is a small thing and not critical (it would honestly be fine if left alone), however

>"vertex" and "fragment" are the common "non-main" conventions for those shader functions.

It is worth noting that the W3C use `vert_main`, `frag_main`, `comp_main`, in their [entry point declaration docs](https://www.w3.org/TR/WGSL/#entry-point-decl), and sotrh uses `vs_main` & `fs_main` in their [learn-wgpu tutorial](https://sotrh.github.io/learn-wgpu/beginner/tutorial3-pipeline/#writing-the-shaders). - So the convention doesn't seem ubiquitous.

> fn vertex(vertex: Vertex) -> VertexOutput {

Author: Hmm you are right. I was thinking of (and emulating) godot's `void vertex()` and `void fragment()` [conventions](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/3.0/tutorials/shading/shading_language.html). I think I still prefer the clarity of `vertex` and `fragment`, but its good to know that theres a variety of options out there. I think I'll probably just leave this as-is for now.

    var out: VertexOutput;
    out.clip_position = view.view_proj * mesh.model * vec4<f32>(vertex.position, 1.0);
    return out;
}
```

### Shader Preprocessor

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, Rob Swain (@superdump), @mockersf</div>

Bevy now has its own custom shader preprocessor. It currently supports `# import`, `# ifdef FOO`, `# ifndef FOO`, `# else`, and `# endif`, but we will expand it with more features as our needs grow.

> Shader preprocessors are often used to selectively enable shader code:

Reviewer 4: 'selectively' -> 'conditionally' ?

```rust
#ifdef TEXTURE
[[group(1), binding(0)]]
var sprite_texture: texture_2d<f32>;
#endif
```

This pattern is very useful when defining complicated / configurable shaders (such as Bevy's PBR shader).

### Shader Imports

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart</div>

The new preprocessor supports importing other shader files (which pulls in their entire contents). This comes in two forms:

Asset path imports:

```rust

> # import "shaders/cool_function.wgsl"

Reviewer 6: in `pbr.wgsl` we use `#import` instead of `# import`, is this a deliberate style decision or a typo?

Reviewer 2: I removed all these spaces in a suggestion. I don't like them. :)

Author: Yeah consistency is good and `#import` _is_ the style we landed on.

    type Key = MyPipelineKey;
    fn specialize(&self, key: Self::Key) -> RenderPipelineDescriptor {
        // define a specialized pipeline for the given key here
    }
}
```

Implementors of this trait can then easily and cheaply access specialized pipeline variants (with automatic per-key caching and hot-reloading). If this feels too abstract / advanced, don't worry! This is a "mid level power-user tool", not something most Bevy App developers need to contend with.

### Simpler Shader Stack

Bevy now uses [Naga](https://github.com/gfx-rs/naga) for all of its shader needs. As a result, we were able to remove all of our complicated non-rust shader dependencies: `glsl_to_spriv`, `shaderc`, and `spirv_reflect`. `glsl_to_spriv` was a major producer of platform-specific build dependencies and bugs, so this is a huge win!

### Features Ported to the New Renderer

Render logic for internal Bevy crates had to be rewritten in a number of cases to take advantage of the new renderer. The following people helped with this effort:

* bevy_sprites: @cart, @StarArawn 
* bevy_pbr: Rob Swain (@superdump), @aevyrie, @cart, @zicklag, @jakobhellermann
* bevy_ui: @Davier
* bevy_text: @Davier

> * bevy_gltf: Rob Swain (@superdump)

Reviewer 7: if [#bevyengine/3460](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/3460) makes it into the release, i think adding a bullet point for 2D meshes or adding @Davier to `bevy_sprites` would be great

Author: thanks for the heads up. ill update this post to accommodate new changes if/when they get merged

### WebGL2 Support

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @zicklag, @mrk-its, @mockersf, Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

Bevy now has built-in support for deploying to the web using WebGL2 / WASM, thanks to @zicklag adding a native WebGL2 backend to wgpu. There is now no need for the third party `bevy_webgl2` plugin. Any Bevy app can be deployed to the web by running the following commands:

```rust
cargo build --target wasm32-unknown-unknown
wasm-bindgen --out-dir OUTPUT_DIR --target web TARGET_DIR
```

> The New Bevy Renderer developers had to carefully operate within the limits of WebGL2 (ex: storage buffers and compute shaders aren't supported in WebGL2), but the results were worth it! You can try out Bevy's WASM support in your browser using our new [Bevy Examples](/examples) page.

Reviewer: IMO this is a stunning and engaging showcase, and should also be linked at the very top of the release notes.

[![wasm bevy examples](bevy_examples_wasm.png)](/examples)

### Infinite Reverse Z Perspective Projection

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

For improved precision in the "useful range", the industry has largely adopted "reverse projections" with an "infinite" far plane. The new Bevy renderer was adapted to use the "right handed infinite reverse z" projection. [This Nvidia article](https://developer.nvidia.com/content/depth-precision-visualized) does a great job of explaining why this is so worthwhile. 

> ### Compute Shaders

Reviewer 4: Also the "computer shader game of life" example's link should probably target the 0.6 git tag (when the release is baked) to avoid breaking when `main` changes in the future.

> ### Compute Shaders

Reviewer: Or latest, if we think that we're going to keep this path stable.

> ### Compute Shaders

Reviewer 8: I think it makes more sense for links in release notes to point to that specific release.

The new renderer makes it possible for users to write compute shaders. Our new ["compute shader game of life" example](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/main/examples/shader/compute_shader_game_of_life.rs) illustrates how to write compute shaders in Bevy.

![compute game of life](compute.png)

### New Multiple Windows Example

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @DJMcNab</div>

The "multiple windows" example has been updated to use the new renderer apis. Thanks to the new renderer apis, this example is now [much nicer to look at](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/main/examples/window/multiple_windows.rs) (and will look even nicer when we add high level Render Targets).

![multiple windows](multiple_windows.png)

### Crevice

> <div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @mockersf</div>

Reviewer 9: I think it should explain a little why crevice was forked instead of used, and give more credits to crevice (and the PR we use) authors

> <div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @mockersf</div>

Author: Good calls!

> <div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @mockersf</div>

Author: Naw that deserves credit :smile:

```rust
#[derive(AsStd140)]
pub struct MeshUniform {
    pub transform: Mat4,
    pub inverse_transpose_model: Mat4,
}
```

Coupling an `AsStd140` derive with our new `UniformVec<T>` type makes it easy to write Rust types to shader-ready uniform buffers:

```rust
// WGSL shader
struct Mesh {
    model: mat4x4<f32>;
    inverse_transpose_model: mat4x4<f32>;
};

[[group(2), binding(0)]]
var<uniform> mesh: Mesh;
```

### UV Sphere Mesh Shape

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @nside</div>

Bevy now has a built-in "uv sphere" mesh primitive.

```rust
Mesh::from(UVSphere {
    radius: 1.0,
    sectors: 16,
    stacks: 32,
})
```

![uv sphere](uv_sphere.png)

### Flat Normal Computation

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @jakobhellermann</div>

The `Mesh` type now has a `compute_flat_normals()` function. Imported GLTF meshes without normals now automatically have flat normals computed, [in accordance with the GLTF spec](https://www.khronos.org/registry/glTF/specs/2.0/glTF-2.0.html#meshes). 

![flat normals](flat_normals.png)

> ### Faster GLTF Loading

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth noting that support for loading compressed textures is in the works which also enormously speeds up loading non-trivial scenes?

> <div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @DJMcNab, @mockers</div>

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @DJMcNab, @mockersf</div>
```

```rust
// This is a standalone Bevy 0.5 App that adds a simple `gravity` system to the App's schedule
// and automatically runs it in parallel with other systems
fn main() {
    App::new()
        .add_plugins(DefaultPlugins)
        .add_system(gravity.system())
        .run();
}

fn gravity(time: Res<Time>, mut query: Query<&mut Transform>) {
    for mut transform in query.iter_mut() {
        transform.translation.y += -9.8 * time.delta_seconds();
    }
}
```

I believe we were already the best in the market by a wide margin (especially if you take into account our automatic parallelization and change detection), but we had one thing holding us back from perfection ... that pesky `.system()`! We've tried removing it a number of times, but due to rustc limitations and safety issues, it always eluded us. Finally, @DJMcNab [found a solution](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2398). As a result, in Bevy 0.6 you can now register the system above like this:

```rust
// pure bliss!
App::new()

>     .add_system(gravity)

Reviewer 7: i think you should add `.add_plugins(DefaultPlugins)` too, currently it makes you think, that the `DefaultPlugins` are not needed any more.

    .run();
```

### The New Component Trait and #[derive(Component)]

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Frizi</div>

In **Bevy 0.6** types no longer implement the {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_ecs" version="0.6.0" name="Component")}} trait by default. Before you get angry ... stick with me for a second. I promise this is for the best! In past Bevy versions, we got away with "auto implementing" {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_ecs" version="0.6.0" name="Component")}} for types using this "blanket impl":

```rust
impl<T: Send + Sync + 'static> Component for T {}
```

This removed the need for users to manually implement {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_ecs" version="0.6.0" name="Component")}} for their types. Early on this seemed like an ergonomics win with no downsides. But Bevy ECS, our understanding of the problem space, and our plans for the future have changed a lot since then:

> * **It turns out everything _should not_ be a Component**: Our users _constantly_ accidentally add non-component types as components (newbies accidentally adding Bundles and type constructors as Components are our most common `#help` channel threads on [our Discord](https://discord.gg/bevy)). This class of error is very hard to debug because things just silently "don't work". When everything isn't a Component, rustc can properly yell at you with informative errors when you mess up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **It turns out _not everything_ should be a Component**: Our users _constantly_ accidentally add non-component types as components (newbies accidentally adding Bundles and type constructors as Components are our most common `#help` channel threads on [our Discord](https://discord.gg/bevy)). This class of error is very hard to debug because things just silently "don't work". When not everything is a Component, rustc can properly yell at you with informative errors when you mess up.
```

> * **It turns out everything _should not_ be a Component**: Our users _constantly_ accidentally add non-component types as components (newbies accidentally adding Bundles and type constructors as Components are our most common `#help` channel threads on [our Discord](https://discord.gg/bevy)). This class of error is very hard to debug because things just silently "don't work". When everything isn't a Component, rustc can properly yell at you with informative errors when you mess up.

Reviewer 2: I made a similar suggestion later in this comments thread but with different emphasis. This kind of set logic vs common language breaks me. In Swedish too.

> * **It turns out everything _should not_ be a Component**: Our users _constantly_ accidentally add non-component types as components (newbies accidentally adding Bundles and type constructors as Components are our most common `#help` channel threads on [our Discord](https://discord.gg/bevy)). This class of error is very hard to debug because things just silently "don't work". When everything isn't a Component, rustc can properly yell at you with informative errors when you mess up.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps `It turns out _not everything_ should be a Component**`? (emphasis moved)

* **Optimizations**: If we implement Component for everything automatically, we can't customize the Component type with associated types. This prevents an entire class of optimization. For example, Bevy ECS now has [multiple Component storage types](/news/bevy-0-5/#hybrid-component-storage-the-solution). By moving the storage type into Component, we enable rustc to optimize checks that would normally need to happen at runtime. @Frizi was able to [significantly improve our Query iterator performance](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2254#issuecomment-857863116) by moving the storage type into Component. I expect us to find more optimizations in this category.

> * **Automatic registration**: Moving more logic into Component also gives us the ability to do fancier things in the future like "automatically registering Reflect impls when deriving Component". Non-blanket Component impls do add a small amount of boilerplate, but they also have the potential to massively reduce the "total boilerplate" of an app.

Reviewer 2: This will be nice when we do stuff with Scene assets.

* **Documentation**: Deriving Component serves as a form of self-documentation. Its now easy to tell what types are components at a glance.

> * **Decentralized**: In Bevy 0.5 Component-specific configuration like "storage type" had to be registered in a centralized Plugin somewhere. Moving Component configuration into the Component trait decentralizes things and allows users to keep "Component type information" right next to the type itself. 

Reviewer 4: In my opinion 'Decentralised' is an odd wording choice for "moving related blocks of code nearer to each other". 

Perhaps 'Code Locality' or something along those lines would be more appropriate phrasing?

> * **Event Handlers**: Non-blanket Component impls allow us to add event handlers like `on_insert(world: &mut World)` to the Component trait. Very useful! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Event Handlers**: Non-blanket Component impls will eventually allow us to add event handlers like `on_insert(world: &mut World)` to the Component trait. Very useful! 
```

This isn't currently done, right?

Hopefully by now you're convinced that this is the right move. If not ... I'm sorry ... you still need to implement Component manually in Bevy 0.6. You can either derive Component:

```rust
// defaults to "Table" storage
#[derive(Component)]
struct SomeComponent;

// overrides the default storage
#[derive(Component)]
#[component(storage = "SparseSet")]
struct SomeComponent;
```

Or you can manually implement it:

```rust
struct SomeComponent;

impl Component for SomeComponent {
    type Storage = TableStorage;
}

impl Component for Movable {
    type Storage = SparseSetStorage;
}
```

### iter() for mutable Queries

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Guvante</div>

> Mutable queries can now be immutably iterated (which returns immutable references):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mutable queries can now be immutably iterated, returning immutable references to components:
```

```rust
fn system(mut players: Query<&mut Player>) {
    for player in players.iter() {
        // player is an immutable reference
    }

    for mut player in players.iter_mut() {
        // player is a mutable reference
    }
}
```

Compare that to the complicated QuerySet that this would have needed in previous Bevy versions to avoid conflicting immutable and mutable Queries:

```rust
// Gross!
fn system(mut players: QuerySet<(QueryState<&Player>, QueryState<&mut Player>)>) {
    for player in players.q0().iter() {
        // player is an immutable reference
    }

    for mut player in players.q1().iter_mut() {
        // player is a mutable reference
    }
}
```

### SystemState

> Have you ever wanted to use "system params" directly with a Bevy World? With {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" version="0.6.0" name="SystemState")}}, now you can!

Reviewer: This is underhyped. SystemState is an absolute game-changer for how easy it is to work with the `World` for any non-trivial piece of code, because it handles the split mutability for you using a familiar API.

Author: Added more hype!

```rust
let mut system_state: SystemState<(Res<A>, Query<&B>)> = SystemState::new(&mut world);
let (a, query) = system_state.get(&world);
```

{{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" version="0.6.0" name="SystemState")}} does all of the same caching that a normal Bevy system does, so reusing the same SystemState results in uber-fast World access.

### Sub Apps

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @zicklag, @bjorn3</div>

> The new Bevy renderer requires strict separation between the "main app" and the "render app". To enable this, we added the concept of "sub apps":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new Bevy renderer requires strict separation between the "main app" and the "render app". To enable this, we added the concept of "sub-apps":
```

This definitely needs hyphenation or contraction for clarity.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Clone, Copy, Hash, PartialEq, Eq, AppLabel)]
pub struct RenderApp;

let mut render_app = App::empty();
app.add_sub_app(RenderApp, render_app, move |app_world, render_app| {
    // execute app logic here
});

// later
app.sub_app_mut(RenderApp)
    .add_system(some_system);
    .add_system(some_other_system);
```

> We plan on exposing more control over scheduling and running sub apps in the future.

Author: style update: included an oxford comma

### Query::iter_combinations

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Frizi</div>

> You can now iterate all permutations of N entities for a given query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the power of [const generics](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2021/02/26/const-generics-mvp-beta.html), you can now iterate all permutations of N entities for a given query:
```

```rust

> fn system(query: Query<&Player>) {

Reviewer: This should be a mutable reference, as that's where the true power of the feature lies.

Author: That complicates things slightly as then we need to go in to why you cant use normal iterators with the mutable variant / why the apis aren't consistent.  I think I'd rather let documentation + examples cover that use case, just to save space (and user brain power).

    // iterates each possible combination of two entities exactly once
    for [e1, e2] in query.iter_combinations() {
    }

    // iterates each possible combination of three entities exactly once
    for [e1, e2, e3] in query.iter_combinations() {
    }
}
```

> This is especially useful for things like "checking for entities for collisions with all other entities". There is also an `iter_combinations_mut` variant. Just be careful ... the time complexity of this grows quickly with large numbers of combinations. With great power comes great responsibility!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is especially useful for things like "checking for entities for collisions with all other entities". There is also an `iter_combinations_mut` variant. Just be careful ... the time complexity of this grows quickly (faster than exponentially!) as the number of entities in your combination increases. With great power comes great responsibility!
```

> The new `iter_combinations.rs` example illustrats how to use this new API to calculate gravity between objects in a "solar system":

Reviewer 4: This could link to the example mentioned.

![iter_combinations](iter_combinations.png)

### Optimized System Commands

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @NathanSWard</div>

System Commands got a nice performance boost by changing how command buffers are stored and reused:

#### Entity Spawn Benchmark Duration (in microseconds, less is better)

> This benchmark spawns entities with a variety of component compositions to ensure we cover a variety of cases. Treat these numbers as realtives, not absolutes.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
This benchmark spawns entities with a variety of component compositions to ensure we cover a variety of cases. Treat these numbers as relatives, not absolutes.
```

![commands perf](commands_perf.svg)

### System Param Lifetimes

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @BoxyUwU, @TheRawMeatball</div>

> System and Query lifetimes were made more explicit by splitting out the `'system` and `'world`, lifetimes and using them explicitly where possible. This enables Rust to reason about ECS lifetimes more effectively, especially for read-only lifetimes. This was particularly important because it enabled the new Bevy Renderer to convince WGPU that ECS resources actually live for as long as the Render World.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
System and Query lifetimes were made more explicit by splitting out the `'system` and `'world`, lifetimes and using them explicitly where possible. This enables Rust to reason about ECS lifetimes more effectively, especially for read-only lifetimes. This was particularly important because it enabled the new Bevy Renderer to convince wgpu that ECS resources actually live for as long as the Render World.
```

### Soundness / Correctness Improvements

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @BoxyUwU, @TheRawMeatball, @Frizi, @thebluefish, @sapir, @bjorn3, @DJMcNab</div>

> Bevy ECS received a solid number of soundness and correctness improvements this release, alongside some unsafe code removals. Queries and internal storages like Tables and BlobVecs in particular had a number of improvements in these areas. And we have even more improvements in the works!

Reviewer 3: Agreed, it's not a good look

I'd be tempted to remove this section entirely, or least not mentioning the soundness fixes.

Perhaps:

We've been working on reducing and scoping the unsafe code in our core ECS abstraction, to make bevy_ecs's correctness easier to reason about. Work on this will continue into the future.

> Bevy ECS received a solid number of soundness and correctness improvements this release, alongside some unsafe code removals. Queries and internal storages like Tables and BlobVecs in particular had a number of improvements in these areas. And we have even more improvements in the works!

Reviewer 8: No. I don't think we should be worried about "a good look" or "saving face". We should be honest, open, and transparent. We had bugs -- and we owe it to the community to clearly communicate about it. Not great to pretend that everything is rosy.

I stand by what I said. We should say we found soundness bugs and fixed them. We should say that we take code safety seriously and will continue with our efforts to improve in this direction.

> Bevy ECS received a solid number of soundness and correctness improvements this release, alongside some unsafe code removals. Queries and internal storages like Tables and BlobVecs in particular had a number of improvements in these areas. And we have even more improvements in the works!

Author: Yup we definitely need to cover soundness/safety work (both because the people doing the work deserve the credit and its worth being open about this).

However I do feel the need to soften the language here _precisely_ because people take this so seriously. A portion of people who blindly "hate everything with unsafe" will write us off if we aren't careful. We don't have the space (or user attention span) to properly argue points about _why_ Bevy ECS requires unsafe code to provide the features that it does, why some level of risk is necessary to properly explore the design space, the project's (and my own) progression from "use unsafe without proper scrutiny" to "cut it out as much as possible", etc, etc. This is a "win hearts and minds" blog post. I don't think we can accomplish that goal if we broach this subject with a greater level of detail than we already have. I'm happy to publicly cover this subject with complete transparency in a different public setting where we can give it the nuance it deserves.

But I do agree that this could use some rephrasing to avoid conflating "resolved safety bug / mistake" with "safety improvement as a feature" and properly stress that we take safety issues seriously. That is a bad look. I'll rework this a bit.

> Bevy ECS received a solid number of soundness and correctness improvements this release, alongside some unsafe code removals. Queries and internal storages like Tables and BlobVecs in particular had a number of improvements in these areas. And we have even more improvements in the works!

Author: Just rephrased things a bit.

### Hierarchy Convenience Functions

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @TheRawMeatball, @jihiggins</div>

```rust
// Despawns all descendants of an entity (its children, its childrens' children, etc)
commands.entity(e).despawn_descendants();

// Removes the given children from the entity
commands.entity(parent).remove_children(&[child1, child2]);
```

## UI

### Overflow::Hidden

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Davier</div>

> UI now repects the flexbox `Overflow::Hidden` property. This can be used to cut off child content, which is useful when building things like scrollable lists:

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
UI now respects the flexbox `Overflow::Hidden` property. This can be used to cut off child content, which is useful when building things like scrollable lists:
```

![overflow hidden](overflow.png)

### Text2D Transforms

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @nside</div>

`Text2d` now supports arbirtary transformations using the Transform component:`

![text 2d transforms](text2d_transforms.png)

> Note that while `Transform::scale` does have it uses, it is generally still a good idea to adjust text size using the "font size" to ensure it renders "crisply".

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Note that while `Transform::scale` does have its uses, it is generally still a good idea to adjust text size using the "font size" to ensure it renders "crisply".
```

> ## Profiling

Reviewer 8: I feel this section should be moved further down, after all the other new features have been presented. After "Transforms" and "Input".

### More Spans

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @mockersf, @hymm</div>

The new renderer now has tracing spans for frames, the render app schedule, and the Render Graph (with named Sub Graphs spans). The system executor now has finer grained spans, filling in most of the remaining blanks. Applying System Commands also now has spans.

> (ignore those weird characters in the spans ... we're investigating that)

Reviewer 9: Oh I didn't know we were investigating that? You have an issue number? 😄 

It looks like terminal escape codes that are also kept in the trace

Author: Bawhaha its just on my "informal list of things to fix". Definitely deserves an issue

Author: https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/3563

![render app profiling](render_app_profiling.png)

### Tracy Backend

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

> We now have built in support for the [tracy](https://github.com/wolfpld/tracy) profiler via the `trace_tracy` Cargo feature.

Reviewer 2: Maybe a screenshot here too? I think I had a good one showing the stats of system execution time for cluster light assignment, or frustum culling.

## Transforms

### Friendly Directional Vectors

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @guimcaballero</div>

Bevy Transforms now have friendly "directional" functions that return relative vectors:

```rust
// Points to the left of the transform
let left: Vec4 = transform.left();
// Points to the right of the transform
let right: Vec4 = transform.right();
// Points up from the transform
let up: Vec4 = transform.up();
// Points down from the transform
let down: Vec4 = transform.down();
// Points forward from the transform
let forward: Vec4 = transform.forward();
// Points back from the transform
let back: Vec4 = transform.back();
```

### Transform Builder Methods

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Lythenas</div>

Transforms now have helpful `with_translation()`, `with_rotation()`, and `with_scale()` builder methods:

```rust
Transform::from_xyz(0.0, 0.0, 10.0).with_scale(Vec3::splat(2.0))
```

## Rust 2021

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf, @YohDeadfall</div>

> Bevy has been updated to use Rust 2021. This means we can take advantage of the new Cargo feature resolver by default (which the new WGPU version requires). Make sure you update your projects to Rust 2021 or you will need to manually enable the new feature resolver!

Reviewer 11: Might be a good idea to call out workspaces specifically as a pitfall here for the resolver issue. Could throw in a toml example for emphasis even. It has bitten me a couple of times already when I keep forgetting about it, so no harm in drawing attention to it as a reminder.

Reviewer 9: I'm not sure it's the release note place to explain how rust works... but a link to https://doc.rust-lang.org/edition-guide/rust-2021/default-cargo-resolver.html#details that's explaining what to do could be good

> Bevy has been updated to use Rust 2021. This means we can take advantage of the new Cargo feature resolver by default (which the new WGPU version requires). Make sure you update your projects to Rust 2021 or you will need to manually enable the new feature resolver!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bevy has been updated to use Rust 2021. This means we can take advantage of the new Cargo feature resolver by default (which the new wgpu version requires). Make sure you update your projects to Rust 2021 or you will need to manually enable the new feature resolver!
```

```toml
[package]
name = "your_app"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"
```

## Input

### Gamepads Resource

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @CrazyRoka</div>

**Bevy 0.6** adds a `Gamepads` resource, which automatically maintains a collection of connected gamepads.

```rust
fn system(gamepads: Res<Gamepads>) {
    // iterates every active game pad
    for gamepad in gamepads.iter() {
    }
}
```

### Input "any" variants 

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @DJMcNab</div>

`Input` collections now have an `any_pressed()` function, which returns true when any of the given inputs are pressed. 

```rust
 fn system(input: Res<Input<KeyCode>>) {
    if input.any_pressed([KeyCode::LShift, KeyCode::RShift]) {
        println!("one or both of the two shift keys are pressed");
    }
 }
```

> ### Window Transparency 

Reviewer 8: Why is this a subheading under "Input"? Also it belongs elsewhere and should be reordered. Maybe further up, after the "UI" section?

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @louisgjohnson</div>

Winit's "window transparency" feature is now exposed in Bevy's Window type. This allows users to build "widget like" apps without backgrounds or window decorations (on platforms that support it). Here is a Bevy app with a transparent background, rendering a Bevy Logo sprite on top of my Linux desktop background. Seamless! Cool!

![transparent window](transparent_window.png)

### FromReflect Trait and Derive

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Davier</div>

> Types can now derive the new `FromReflect` trait, which enables creating "clones" of a type using arbitrary `Reflect` impls. This is currently used to make reflected collection types (like `Vec`) work propely, but it will also be useful for "round trip" conversions to and from `Reflect` types.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Types can now derive the new `FromReflect` trait, which enables creating "clones" of a type using arbitrary `Reflect` impls. This is currently used to make reflected collection types (like `Vec`) work properly, but it will also be useful for "round trip" conversions to and from `Reflect` types.
```
Typo with properly.

* The Apache-2.0 license has protections from patent trolls and an explicit contribution licensing clause.
* The Rust ecosystem is largely Apache-2.0. Being available under that license is good for interoperation and opens the doors to upstreaming Bevy code into other projects (Rust, the async ecosystem, etc).
* The Apache license is incompatible with GPLv2, but MIT is compatible. 

## Bevy Org Changes

### More pull request mergers!

I've been at my scalability limits for awhile. It has been  * cough * ... challenging  ... to build the engine features I need to, review every single pull request quickly, and preserve my mental health. I've made it this far ... sometimes by overworking myself and sometimes by letting PRs sit unmerged for longer than I'd like. By scaling out, we can have our cake and eat it too!

* @mockersf now has merge rights for "uncontroversial changes"
* @alice-i-cecile now has merge rights for "uncontroversial documentation changes"

### New issue labels

> After [much discussion about naming conventions and colors](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/2256), we finally have a [fresh new set of issue labels](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/labels) (loosely inspired by the rust repo). The [Bevy Triage Team](https://github.com/orgs/bevyengine/teams/triage-team/members) can finally express themselves fully!

Reviewer 3: Again, I'm on mobile so can't easily check, but is this team publicly viewable?

Reviewer 6: It isn't, I get prompted to log in or get the error message "You’re not a member of any teams in this organization" if I log in with an account not in the bevy org.

Reviewer: Yeah, we have the same issue in the CONTRIBUTING.md file :(

Author: Hmm yeah it looks like teams are fully private. I cant find a useful public link anywhere, so I'll just link to the relevant section of CONTRIBUTING.md

### Comprehensive CONTRIBUTING.md

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @alice-i-cecile</div>

We now have a relatively complete [Contributors Guide](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md). If you are interested in contributing code or documentation to Bevy, that is a great place to start! 

### CI Build System Improvements

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf, @NathanSWard, @NiklasEi</div>

We made a ton of CI improvements this release:

* We now fail on cargo doc warnings
* We now use [cargo deny](https://github.com/EmbarkStudios/cargo-deny) to protect against vulnerabilities, duplicate dependencies, and invalid licenses
* PRs are now automatically labeled with the `S-Needs-Triage` label
* Ci stability and speed improvements
* We now check that our benchmarks build
* We now assert compiler errors for compile_fail tests, giving us much stricter guarantees
* Examples are now run using lavapipe (instead of swiftshader) for faster CI validation

> ## What's Next For Bevy?

Reviewer 12: Is it worth mentioning the RFCs here? Getting more eyes on some of the more further out features for the engine, particularly early on, would be super useful in scoping and shaping those features based on demand and feedback.

Bevy development continues to pick up steam and we have no intention to slow down now!

### The "Train" Release Schedule

In the last two Bevy releases we made massive, sweeping changes to core systems. **Bevy 0.5** was "the one where we rewrote Bevy ECS". **Bevy 0.6** was "the one where we rewrote Bevy Render". These massive reworks took time, and as a result held back a bunch of other useful features and bug fixes.

[The Bevy Community](https://bevyengine.org/community/) has reached relative consensus that we should have a more regular, more predictable release schedule. One where large features can't gum up the system.

> From now on, we will cut releases _approximately_ once every three months (as an upper bound ... sometimes we might release early if it makes sense). After the end of a release cycle, we will start preparing to cut a release. If there are small tweaks that need to be made or "life happens" ... we will happily postpone releases. But we won't hold releases back for "big ticket" items any more.

Reviewer 8: Ideally, I'd like us to go as far as to have fixed predetermined release dates, that can only be changed in an emergency. Say, something like: the first Thursday of {January, April, July, October}. Even put the date of the next release in the main Readme on github, so everyone can plan around it.

I know I might be asking for too much. I don't insist. Just stating a proposal for what I think would be ideal, given all the concerns you listed.

Ultimately, it's up to you, @cart, to decide. Do what feels right. :)

> From now on, we will cut releases _approximately_ once every three months (as an upper bound ... sometimes we might release early if it makes sense). After the end of a release cycle, we will start preparing to cut a release. If there are small tweaks that need to be made or "life happens" ... we will happily postpone releases. But we won't hold releases back for "big ticket" items any more.

Author: Disclaimer: I've thought a lot about this one and I'm pretty resolved at this point.

The reasons to avoid absolute / fixed dates are as follows:
* If something is broken / release blocking, we shouldn't feel pressure to crunch just to meet an arbitrary deadline
* We shouldn't arbitrarily limit ourselves if something important is just a day or so from being ready

The goal of the "train release schedule" is to ensure we don't delay releases and establish some level of "trust" in the system.

We can accomplish that by "kicking off" releases on a regular schedule and generally trying to release "on time", but with just a small amount of wiggle room to account for human / life factors. Ideally we hit our targets every time (and I suspect that we will get better at it over time). But our users don't actually care about exact 3-month cadences, so we shouldn't stress about it either.

> From now on, we will cut releases _approximately_ once every three months (as an upper bound ... sometimes we might release early if it makes sense). After the end of a release cycle, we will start preparing to cut a release. If there are small tweaks that need to be made or "life happens" ... we will happily postpone releases. But we won't hold releases back for "big ticket" items any more.

Reviewer 8: Okay! I'm happy with that. Thanks for clarifying your final thoughts on the subject and how you envision it panning out.

We are balancing a lot of different concerns here:
* Building trust with Bevy contributors that their changes will land in a timely manner
* Building trust with Bevy users that they will receive regular updates and bug fixes
* Giving enough time between releases to cut down on churn in the Bevy Plugin ecosystem (Bevy isn't "stable" yet, but longer releases give reasonable windows of "ecosystem stability") 
* Providing enough content in a release to generate "hype". Bevy release blog posts tend to be a "rallying cry" for the community and I don't want to lose that.
* Establishing proper work / life balance for core developers (crunch is bad!)
    
We will refine this process over time and see what works best.

> ### More Renderer Features

Reviewer 2: SSAO, compressed textures, more modular/reusable PBR shader types and functions, soft shadows, ... 😄 and then all the stuff we haven't even started on.

Author: Done (with one exception)! Can you elaborate on soft shadows? Does that fall under the current "shadow filters and cascades" category, or are you thinking more about "ray traced soft shadows"?

Reviewer 2: No. Percentage Closer Soft Shadows.

Reviewer 2: For now. :)

> * **Post Processing Stack / HDR / Bloom**: HDR and bloom [almost made it into Bevy 0.6](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2876), but we decided to hold them back so can polish them a bit and build a proper "modular post processing stack".

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* **Post Processing Stack / HDR / Bloom**: HDR and bloom [almost made it into Bevy 0.6](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2876), but we decided to hold them back so we can polish them a bit and build a proper "modular post processing stack".
```

or

```suggestion
* **Post Processing Stack / HDR / Bloom**: HDR and bloom [almost made it into Bevy 0.6](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2876), but we decided to hold them to polish them a bit and build a proper "modular post processing stack".
```

* **Skeletal Animation**: Ultimately Bevy will have a general purpose, property based animation system (we already have a [working implementation](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/1429)). We've been holding off on adding skeletal animation, so we can slot it in to that system, but in retrospect that was a mistake. People need skeletal animation _now_. In the short term we will build a scoped 3d skeletal animation system, just to get the ball rolling. Then later we will port it to the general purpose system (whenever that is ready), 

> * **Global Illumination**: GI will provide a massive boost to the feel of "realism", so it is worth prioritizing at least one form of GI in the sort term.

Reviewer 13: Typo: "sort term" > "short term"

* **Shadow Filters and Cascades**: Rob Swain (@superdump) has already done a lot of work in this area, so we will hopefully see that materialize in a Bevy release soon.

### UI Refresh

We will break ground on the Bevy Editor this year. To do that, we need a number of improvements to Bevy UI:
* Improved "data driven UI" (potentially "reactive")
* A solid set of pre-constructed widgets
* Generally improved UX

We now have a plethora of UI experiments in the Bevy community. Over the next few months we will refine our scope and begin the process of "selecting a winner".

### Asset Preprocessing

> Preprocesing assets is a critical part of a production game engine. It cuts down on startup times, reduces our CPU and GPU memory footprint, enables more complicated development workflows, makes it easier to ship assets with games, and cuts down on the final size of a deployed game. We've made it this far without an asset preprocessing system ... but barely. Solving this problem ASAP is a high priority for me.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Preprocessing assets is a critical part of a production game engine. It cuts down on startup times, reduces our CPU and GPU memory footprint, enables more complicated development workflows, makes it easier to ship assets with games, and cuts down on the final size of a deployed game. We've made it this far without an asset preprocessing system ... but barely. Solving this problem ASAP is a high priority for me.
```

Another little typo here.

* **Industry Proven**: We've taken inspiration from battle tested renderer architectures, such as [Bungie's pipelined Destiny renderer](https://advances.realtimerendering.com/destiny/gdc_2015/Tatarchuk_GDC_2015__Destiny_Renderer_web.pdf). We also learned a lot from (and worked closely with) other renderer developers in the Rust space, namely @aclysma ([rafx](https://github.com/aclysma/rafx)) and @cwfitzgerald ([rend3](https://github.com/BVE-Reborn/rend3)). The New Bevy Renderer wouldn't be what it is without them and I highly recommend checking out their projects!

I promise I'll qualify all of those fluffy buzzwords below. I am confident that the New Bevy Renderer will be a rallying point for the Bevy graphics ecosystem and (hopefully) the Rust graphics ecosystem at large. We still have _plenty_ of work to do, but I'm proud of what we have accomplished so far and I'm excited for the future!

![bistro day](bistro_day.png)

### Why build a new renderer?

> Before we cover whats new, its worth discussing why we embarked on such a massive effort. The old Bevy Renderer got a number of things right:

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
Before we cover whats new, it's worth discussing why we embarked on such a massive effort. The old Bevy Renderer got a number of things right:
```

![point light](point_light.png)

### Enabling and Disabling Entity Shadows

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

Mesh entities can opt out of casting shadows by adding the {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="NotShadowCaster")}} component.

```rust
commands.entity(entity).insert(NotShadowCaster);
```

Likewise they can opt out of receiving shadows by adding the {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="NotShadowReceiver")}} component.

```rust
commands.entity(entity).insert(NotShadowReceiver);
```

### Spherical Area Lights

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Josh015</div>

`PointLight` Components can now define a `radius` value, which controls the size of the sphere that emits light. A normal zero-sized "point light" has a radius of zero.

![spherical area lights](spherical_area_lights.png)

(Note that lights with a radius don't normally take up physical space in the world ... I added meshes to help illustrate light position and size)

### Configurable Alpha Blend Modes

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

> Bevy's StandardMaterial now has a `alpha_mode` field, which can be set to `AlphaMode::Opaque`, `AlphaMode::Mask(f32)`, or `AlphaMode::Blend`. This field is properly set when loading GLTF scenes.

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
Bevy's StandardMaterial now has an `alpha_mode` field, which can be set to `AlphaMode::Opaque`, `AlphaMode::Mask(f32)`, or `AlphaMode::Blend`. This field is properly set when loading GLTF scenes.
```

* **Optimizations**: If we implement Component for everything automatically, we can't customize the Component type with associated types. This prevents an entire class of optimization. For example, Bevy ECS now has [multiple Component storage types](/news/bevy-0-5/#hybrid-component-storage-the-solution). By moving the storage type into Component, we enable rustc to optimize checks that would normally need to happen at runtime. @Frizi was able to [significantly improve our Query iterator performance](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2254#issuecomment-857863116) by moving the storage type into Component. I expect us to find more optimizations in this category.
* **Automatic registration**: Moving more logic into Component also gives us the ability to do fancier things in the future like "automatically registering Reflect impls when deriving Component". Non-blanket Component impls do add a small amount of boilerplate, but they also have the potential to massively reduce the "total boilerplate" of an app.

> * **Documentation**: Deriving Component serves as a form of self-documentation. Its now easy to tell what types are components at a glance.

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
* **Documentation**: Deriving Component serves as a form of self-documentation. It's now easy to tell what types are components at a glance.
```

* **Decentralized**: In Bevy 0.5 Component-specific configuration like "storage type" had to be registered in a centralized Plugin somewhere. Moving Component configuration into the Component trait decentralizes things and allows users to keep "Component type information" right next to the type itself. 
* **Event Handlers**: Non-blanket Component impls will eventually allow us to add event handlers like `on_insert(world: &mut World)` to the Component trait. Very useful! 

Hopefully by now you're convinced that this is the right move. If not ... I'm sorry ... you still need to implement Component manually in Bevy 0.6. You can either derive Component:

```rust
// defaults to "Table" storage
#[derive(Component)]
struct SomeComponent;

// overrides the default storage
#[derive(Component)]
#[component(storage = "SparseSet")]
struct SomeComponent;
```

Or you can manually implement it:

```rust
struct SomeComponent;

impl Component for SomeComponent {
    type Storage = TableStorage;
}

> impl Component for Movable {

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
impl Component for SomeComponent {
```

pub struct RenderApp;

let mut render_app = App::empty();
app.add_sub_app(RenderApp, render_app, move |app_world, render_app| {
    // execute app logic here
});

// later
app.sub_app_mut(RenderApp)
    .add_system(some_system);
    .add_system(some_other_system);
```

We plan on exposing more control over scheduling, running, and working with sub-apps in the future.

### Query::iter_combinations

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Frizi</div>

You can now iterate all permutations of N entities for a given query:

```rust
fn system(query: Query<&Player>) {
    // iterates each possible combination of two entities exactly once
    for [p1, p2] in query.iter_combinations() {
    }

    // iterates each possible combination of three entities exactly once
    for [p1, p2, p3] in query.iter_combinations() {
    }
}
```

This is especially useful for things like "checking for entities for collisions with all other entities". There is also an `iter_combinations_mut` variant. Just be careful ... the time complexity of this grows quickly (faster than exponentially!) as the number of entities in your combinations increases. With great power comes great responsibility!

> The new `iter_combinations.rs` example illustrats how to use this new API to calculate gravity between objects in a "solar system":

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
The new `iter_combinations.rs` example illustrates how to use this new API to calculate gravity between objects in a "solar system":
```

pub struct RenderApp;

let mut render_app = App::empty();
app.add_sub_app(RenderApp, render_app, move |app_world, render_app| {
    // execute app logic here
});

// later
app.sub_app_mut(RenderApp)
    .add_system(some_system);
    .add_system(some_other_system);
```

We plan on exposing more control over scheduling, running, and working with sub-apps in the future.

### Query::iter_combinations

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Frizi</div>

You can now iterate all permutations of N entities for a given query:

```rust
fn system(query: Query<&Player>) {
    // iterates each possible combination of two entities exactly once
    for [p1, p2] in query.iter_combinations() {
    }

    // iterates each possible combination of three entities exactly once
    for [p1, p2, p3] in query.iter_combinations() {
    }
}
```

This is especially useful for things like "checking for entities for collisions with all other entities". There is also an `iter_combinations_mut` variant. Just be careful ... the time complexity of this grows quickly (faster than exponentially!) as the number of entities in your combinations increases. With great power comes great responsibility!

> The new `iter_combinations.rs` example illustrates how to use this new API to calculate gravity between objects in a "solar system":

Reviewer 9: there is https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/3075 that would make that screenshot less... gray

* High level custom Materials
* More powerful shaders: preprocessors, imports, WGSL support
* Bevy ECS ergonomics and performance improvements. No more `.system()`!

Read on for details!

<!-- more -->

## The New Bevy Renderer

**Bevy 0.6** introduces a brand new modern renderer that is:
* **Faster**: More parallel, less computation per-entity, more efficient CPU->GPU dataflow, and (with soon-to-be-enabled) pipelined rendering
* **Prettier**: We're releasing the new renderer alongside a number of graphical improvements, such as directional and point light shadows, clustered forward rendering (so you can draw more lights in a scene), and spherical area lights. We also have a ton of new features in development (cascaded shadow maps, bloom, particles, shadow filters, and more!)
* **Simpler**: Fewer layers of abstraction, simpler data flow, improved low-level, mid-level, and high-level interfaces, direct wgpu access 
* **Modular to its core**: Standardized 2d and 3d core pipelines, extensible Render Phases and Views, composable entity/component-driven draw functions, shader imports, extensible and repeatable render pipelines via "sub graphs"

> * **Industry Proven**: We've taken inspiration from battle tested renderer architectures, such as [Bungie's pipelined Destiny renderer](https://advances.realtimerendering.com/destiny/gdc_2015/Tatarchuk_GDC_2015__Destiny_Renderer_web.pdf). We also learned a lot from (and worked closely with) other renderer developers in the Rust space, namely @aclysma ([rafx](https://github.com/aclysma/rafx)) and @cwfitzgerald ([rend3](https://github.com/BVE-Reborn/rend3)). The New Bevy Renderer wouldn't be what it is without them and I highly recommend checking out their projects!

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
* **Industry Proven**: We've taken inspiration from battle tested renderer architectures, such as [Bungie's pipelined Destiny renderer](https://advances.realtimerendering.com/destiny/gdc_2015/Tatarchuk_GDC_2015__Destiny_Renderer_web.pdf). We also learned a lot from (and worked closely with) other renderer developers in the Rust space, namely @aclysma ([rafx](https://github.com/aclysma/rafx)) and @cwfitzgerald ([rend3](https://github.com/BVE-Reborn/rend3)). The New Bevy Renderer wouldn't be what it is without them, and I highly recommend checking out their projects!
```

I promise I'll qualify all of those fluffy buzzwords below. I am confident that the New Bevy Renderer will be a rallying point for the Bevy graphics ecosystem and (hopefully) the Rust graphics ecosystem at large. We still have _plenty_ of work to do, but I'm proud of what we have accomplished so far and I'm excited for the future!

![bistro day](bistro_day.png)

### Why build a new renderer?

> Before we cover whats new, it's worth discussing why we embarked on such a massive effort. The old Bevy Renderer got a number of things right:

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
Before we cover what's new, it's worth discussing why we embarked on such a massive effort. The old Bevy Renderer got a number of things right:
```

* **Modular render logic** (via the Render Graph)
* **Multiple backends** (both first and third party)
* **High level data-driven API**: this made it easy and ergonomic to write custom per-entity render logic

> However it also had a number of _significant_ shortcomings:

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
However, it also had a number of _significant_ shortcomings:
```

> * **Complex**: The "high level ease of use" came at the cost of significant implementation complexity, performance overhead, and invented jargon. Users were often overwhelmed when trying to operate at any level but "high level". When managing "render resources", it was easy to do something "wrong" and hard to tell "what went wrong".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Complex**: The "high-level ease of use" came at the cost of significant implementation complexity, performance overhead, and invented jargon. Users were often overwhelmed when trying to operate at any level but "high-level". When managing "render resources", it was easy to do something "wrong" and hard to tell "what went wrong".
```

> * **Often slow**: Features like "sprite rendering" were built on the costly high level abstractions mentioned above. Performance was ... suboptimal when compared to other options in the ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Often slow**: Features like "sprite rendering" were built on the costly high-level abstractions mentioned above. Performance was ... suboptimal when compared to other options in the ecosystem.
```

* **User-facing internals**: It stored a lot of internal render state directly on each entity. This took up space, computing the state was expensive, and it gunked up user-facing APIs with a bunch of "do not touch" render Components. This state (or at least, the component metadata) needed to be written to / read from Scenes, which was also suboptimal and error prone.
* **Repeating render logic was troublesome**: Viewports, rendering to multiple textures / windows, and shadow maps were possible, but they required hard-coding, special casing, and boilerplate. This wasn't aligned with our goals for modularity and clarity.

### Why now?

> The shortcomings above were acceptable in Bevy's early days, but were clearly holding us back as Bevy grew from a [one person side project](bevyengine.org/news/introducing-bevy) to the most popular Rust game engine on Github (and one of the most [popular open source game engine ... period](https://github.com/topics/game-engine)). A "passable" renderer no longer cuts it when we have hundreds of contributors, a paid full time developer, thousands of individual users, and a growing number of companies paying people to work on Bevy apps and features. It was time for a change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The shortcomings above were acceptable in Bevy's early days, but were clearly holding us back as Bevy grew from a [one person side project](bevyengine.org/news/introducing-bevy) to the most popular Rust game engine on Github (and one of the most [popular open source game engines ... period](https://github.com/topics/game-engine)). A "passable" renderer no longer cuts it when we have hundreds of contributors, a paid full time developer, thousands of individual users, and a growing number of companies paying people to work on Bevy apps and features. It was time for a change.
```

> The shortcomings above were acceptable in Bevy's early days, but were clearly holding us back as Bevy grew from a [one person side project](bevyengine.org/news/introducing-bevy) to the most popular Rust game engine on Github (and one of the most [popular open source game engines ... period](https://github.com/topics/game-engine)). A "passable" renderer no longer cuts it when we have hundreds of contributors, a paid full time developer, thousands of individual users, and a growing number of companies paying people to work on Bevy apps and features. It was time for a change.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
The shortcomings above were acceptable in Bevy's early days, but were clearly holding us back as Bevy grew from a [one person side project](bevyengine.org/news/introducing-bevy) to the most popular Rust game engine on GitHub (and one of the most [popular open source game engines ... period](https://github.com/topics/game-engine)). A "passable" renderer no longer cuts it when we have hundreds of contributors, a paid full-time developer, thousands of individual users, and a growing number of companies paying people to work on Bevy apps and features. It was time for a change.
```

> For a deeper view into our decision making and development process (including the alternatives we considered) check out the [New Renderer Tracking Issue](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/2535). 

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
For a deeper view into our decision-making and development process (including the alternatives we considered) check out the [New Renderer Tracking Issue](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/2535). 
```

### Pipelined Rendering: Extract, Prepare, Queue, Render

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart</div>

Pipelined Rendering is a cornerstone of the new renderer. It accomplishes a number of goals:

* **Increased Parallelism**: We can now start running the main app logic for the next frame, while rendering the current frame. Given that rendering is often a bottleneck, this can be a huge win when there is also a lot of app work to do.
* **Clearer Dataflow and Structure**: Pipelining requires drawing hard lines between "app logic" and "render logic", with a fixed synchronization point (which we call the "extract" step). This makes it easier to reason about dataflow and ownership. Code can be organized along these lines, which improves clarity.

> From a high level, traditional "non-pipelined rendering" looks like this:

Reviewer 2: I added comments hyphenating high-level, but just wanted to note that grammatically, this one should not be hyphenated.

The truth of the matter is that wgpu already occupies _exactly_ the space we want it to:
* Multiple backends, with the goal to support as many platforms as possible
* A "baseline" feature set that works almost everywhere with a consistent API
* A "limits" and "features" system that enables opting-in to arbitrary (sometimes backend-specific features) and detecting when those features are available. This will be important when we start adding things like raytracing and VR support.
* A modern GPU API, but without the pain and complexity of raw Vulkan. Perfect for user-facing Bevy renderer extensions.

> However initially there were a couple of reasons not to make it our "public facing API":

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
However, initially there were a couple of reasons not to make it our "public-facing API":
```

* **Complexity**: wgpu used to be built on top of gfx-hal (an older GPU abstraction layer also built and managed by the wgpu team). These multiple layers of abstraction in multiple repos made contributing to and reasoning about the internals difficult.
* **Licensing**: wgpu used to be licensed under the "copyleft" MPL license, which created concerns about integration with proprietary graphics apis (such as consoles like the Switch).
* **WebGL2 Support**: wgpu used to not have a WebGL2 backend. Bevy's old renderer had a custom WebGL2 backend and we weren't willing to give up support for the Web as a platform.

> _Almost immediately_ after we voiced these concerns, @kvark kicked off a [relicensing effort](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/issues/392) that switched wgpu to the Rust-standard dual MIT/Apache-2.0 license. They also removed gfx-hal in favor of a [much simpler and flatter architecture](https://gfx-rs.github.io/2021/08/18/release-0.10.html). Soon after, @zicklag [added a WebGL2 backend](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/pull/1686). Having resolved all of my remaining hangups, it was clear to me that @kvark's priorities were aligned with mine and that I could trust them to adjust to feedback. And now that wgpu has a flatter architecture, I feel more comfortable forking and maintaining it under the Bevy umbrella if that ever becomes necessary. But I doubt we will ever need to ... wgpu has proven to be a responsive partner and I'm very comfortable letting @kvark own this area, given their expertise.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
_Almost immediately_ after we voiced these concerns, @kvark kicked off a [relicensing effort](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/issues/392) that switched wgpu to the Rust-standard dual MIT/Apache-2.0 license. They also removed gfx-hal in favor of a [much simpler and flatter architecture](https://gfx-rs.github.io/2021/08/18/release-0.10.html). Soon after, @zicklag [added a WebGL2 backend](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/pull/1686). Having resolved all of my remaining hangups, it was clear to me that @kvark's priorities were aligned with mine and that I could trust them to adjust to feedback. Now that wgpu has a flatter architecture, I feel more comfortable forking and maintaining it under the Bevy umbrella if that ever becomes necessary. But I doubt we will ever need to ... wgpu has proven to be a responsive partner and I'm very comfortable letting @kvark own this area, given their expertise.
```

> The New Bevy Renderer tosses out our old intermediate GPU abstraction layer in favor of using wgpu directly as our "low level" GPU api. The result is a simpler (and faster) architecture with full and direct access to wgpu. Feedback from Bevy Renderer feature developers so far has been _very positive_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The New Bevy Renderer tosses out our old intermediate GPU abstraction layer in favor of using wgpu directly as our "low-level" GPU api. The result is a simpler (and faster) architecture with full and direct access to wgpu. Feedback from Bevy Renderer feature developers so far has been _very positive_.
```

### ECS-Driven Rendering

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart</div>

The new renderer is what I like to call "ECS-driven": 

* As we covered previously, the Render World is populated using data Extracted from the Main World.
* Scenes are rendered from one or more Views, which are just Entities in the Render World with Components relevant to that View. View Entities can be extended with arbitrary Components, which makes it easy to extend the renderer with custom View data and logic. Cameras aren't the only type of View. Views can be defined by the Render App for arbitrary concepts, such as "shadow map perspectives".
* Views can have zero or more generic `RenderPhase<T: PhaseItem>` Components, where T defines the "type and scope" of thing being rendered in the phase (ex: "transparent 3d entities in the main pass"). At its core, a `RenderPhase` is a (potentially sorted) list of Entities to be drawn.
* Entities in a RenderPhase are drawn using DrawFunctions, which read ECS data from the Render World and produce GPU commands.

> * DrawFunctions can (optionally) be composed of modular DrawCommands. These are generally scoped to specific actions like `SetStandardMaterialBindGroup`, `DrawMesh`, `SetItemPipeline`, etc. Bevy provides a number of built in DrawCommands and users can also define their own.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* DrawFunctions can (optionally) be composed of modular DrawCommands. These are generally scoped to specific actions like `SetStandardMaterialBindGroup`, `DrawMesh`, `SetItemPipeline`, etc. Bevy provides a number of built-in DrawCommands and users can also define their own.
```

* Render Graph Nodes convert a specific View's RenderPhases into GPU commands by iterating each RenderPhases' Entities and running the appropriate Draw Functions.

> If that seems complicated ... don't worry! These are what I like to call "mid level" renderer APIs. They provide the necessary tools for experienced render feature developers to build modular render plugins with relative ease. We also provide easy to use high level APIs like Materials, which cover the majority of "custom shader logic" use cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If that seems complicated ... don't worry! These are what I like to call "mid-level" renderer APIs. They provide the necessary tools for experienced render feature developers to build modular render plugins with relative ease. We also provide easy to use high-level APIs like Materials, which cover the majority of "custom shader logic" use cases.
```

### Bevy's Core Pipeline

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, Rob Swain (@superdump), @KirmesBude, @mockersf</div>

> The new renderer is _very_ flexible and unopinionated by default. However _too much_ flexibility isn't always desirable. We want a rich Bevy renderer plugin ecosystem where developers have enough freedom to implement what they want, while still maximizing compatibility across plugins.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
The new renderer is _very_ flexible and unopinionated by default. However, _too much_ flexibility isn't always desirable. We want a rich Bevy renderer plugin ecosystem where developers have enough freedom to implement what they want, while still maximizing compatibility across plugins.
```

> The new `bevy_core_pipeline` crate is our answer to this problem. It defines a "core" set of Views / Cameras (2d and 3d), Sub Graphs (ClearPass, MainPass2d, MainPass3d), and Render Phases (`Transparent2d`, `Opaque3d`, `AlphaMask3d`, `Transparent3d`). This provides a "common ground" for render feature developers to build on while still maintaining compatibility with each other. As long as developers operate within these constraints, they should be compatible with the wider ecosystem. Developers are also free to operate outside of these constraints, but that also increases the likelihood that they will be incompatible.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
The new `bevy_core_pipeline` crate is our answer to this problem. It defines a "core" set of Views / Cameras (2d and 3d), Sub Graphs (ClearPass, MainPass2d, MainPass3d), and Render Phases (`Transparent2d`, `Opaque3d`, `AlphaMask3d`, `Transparent3d`). This provides a "common ground" for render feature developers to build on while still maintaining compatibility with each other. As long as developers operate within these constraints, they should be compatible with the wider ecosystem. Developers are also free to operate outside these constraints, but that also increases the likelihood that they will be incompatible.
```

> Bevy's built in render features build on top of the Core Pipeline (ex: `bevy_sprite` and `bevy_pbr`). The Core Pipeline will continue to expand with things like a standardized "post processing" effect stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bevy's built-in render features build on top of the Core Pipeline (ex: `bevy_sprite` and `bevy_pbr`). The Core Pipeline will continue to expand with things like a standardized "post processing" effect stack.
```

### Materials

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart</div>

> The new renderer structure gives developers fine grained control over how entities are drawn. Developers can manually define Extract, Prepare, and Queue systems to draw entities using arbitrary render commands in custom or built in {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_core_pipeline" version="0.6.0" name="RenderPhase" plural=true)}}. However this level of control necessitates understanding the render pipeline internals and involve more boilerplate than most users are willing to tolerate. Sometimes all you want to do is slot your custom material shader into the existing pipelines!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new renderer structure gives developers fine-grained control over how entities are drawn. Developers can manually define Extract, Prepare, and Queue systems to draw entities using arbitrary render commands in custom or built in {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_core_pipeline" version="0.6.0" name="RenderPhase" plural=true)}}. However this level of control necessitates understanding the render pipeline internals and involve more boilerplate than most users are willing to tolerate. Sometimes all you want to do is slot your custom material shader into the existing pipelines!
```

```rust
// register the plugin for a CustomMaterial
app.add_plugin(MaterialPlugin::<CustomMaterial>::default())

impl Material for CustomMaterial {
    // the vertex and fragment shaders are optional
    // they use a default "mesh pipeline shader" if they are not defined
    fn fragment_shader(asset_server: &AssetServer) -> Option<Handle<Shader>> {
        Some(asset_server.load("shaders/custom_material.wgsl"))
    }

    fn bind_group_layout(render_device: &RenderDevice) -> BindGroupLayout {
        /* return bind group layout here */
    }

    fn bind_group(render_asset: &<Self as RenderAsset>::PreparedAsset) -> &BindGroup {
        /* return bind group here */
    }
}
```

> There is also a {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="SpecializedMaterial")}} variant, which enables "specializing" shaders and pipelines using custom per-entity keys. This extra flexibility isn't always needed, but when you need it, you will be glad to have it! For example, the built in StandardMaterial uses specialization to toggle whether or not the Entity should receive lighting in the shader.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
There is also a {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="SpecializedMaterial")}} variant, which enables "specializing" shaders and pipelines using custom per-entity keys. This extra flexibility isn't always needed, but when you need it, you will be glad to have it! For example, the built-in StandardMaterial uses specialization to toggle whether or not the Entity should receive lighting in the shader.
```

We also have big plans to make {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="Material" plural=true)}} even better:
* **Bind Group derives**: this should cut down on the boilerplate of passing materials to the GPU.

> * **Material Instancing**: materials enable us to implement high level mesh instancing as a simple configuration item for both built in and custom materials.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Material Instancing**: materials enable us to implement high-level mesh instancing as a simple configuration item for both built in and custom materials.
```

> * **Material Instancing**: materials enable us to implement high-level mesh instancing as a simple configuration item for both built in and custom materials.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
* **Material Instancing**: materials enable us to implement high-level mesh instancing as a simple configuration item for both built-in and custom materials.
```

### Visibility and Frustum Culling

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

[![view frustum](ViewFrustum.svg)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viewing_frustum#/media/File:ViewFrustum.svg)

> Drawing things is expensive! It requires writing data from the CPU to the GPU, constructing draw calls, and running shaders. We can save a lot of time by _not_ drawing things that the camera can't see. "Frustum culling" is the act of excluding objects that are outside of the bounds of the camera's "view frustum", to avoid wasting work drawing them. For large scenes, this can be the difference between a crisp 60 frames per second and chugging to a grinding halt.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
Drawing things is expensive! It requires writing data from the CPU to the GPU, constructing draw calls, and running shaders. We can save a lot of time by _not_ drawing things that the camera can't see. "Frustum culling" is the act of excluding objects that are outside the bounds of the camera's "view frustum", to avoid wasting work drawing them. For large scenes, this can be the difference between a crisp 60 frames per second and chugging to a grinding halt.
```

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

Directional Lights can now cast "directional shadows", which are "sun-like" shadows cast from a light source infinitely far away. These can be enabled by setting `DirectionalLight::shadows_enabled` to `true`.

![directional light](directional_light.png)

Note: directional shadows currently require more manual configuration than necessary (ex: manual configuration of the shadow projection). We will soon make this automatic and better quality over a larger range through cascaded shadow maps.

### Point Light Shadows

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mtsr, Rob Swain (@superdump), @cart</div>

Point lights can now cast "omnidirectional shadows", which can be enabled by setting `PointLight::shadows_enabled` to `true`:

![point light](point_light.png)

### Enabling and Disabling Entity Shadows

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

Mesh entities can opt out of casting shadows by adding the {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="NotShadowCaster")}} component.

```rust
commands.entity(entity).insert(NotShadowCaster);
```

> Likewise they can opt out of receiving shadows by adding the {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="NotShadowReceiver")}} component.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
Likewise, they can opt out of receiving shadows by adding the {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_pbr" version="0.6.0" name="NotShadowReceiver")}} component.
```

```rust
commands.entity(entity).insert(NotShadowReceiver);
```

### Spherical Area Lights

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Josh015</div>

`PointLight` Components can now define a `radius` value, which controls the size of the sphere that emits light. A normal zero-sized "point light" has a radius of zero.

![spherical area lights](spherical_area_lights.png)

(Note that lights with a radius don't normally take up physical space in the world ... I added meshes to help illustrate light position and size)

### Configurable Alpha Blend Modes

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

Bevy's StandardMaterial now has an `alpha_mode` field, which can be set to `AlphaMode::Opaque`, `AlphaMode::Mask(f32)`, or `AlphaMode::Blend`. This field is properly set when loading GLTF scenes.

![alpha blend modes](alpha_blend.png)

### Clustered Forward Rendering 

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

> Modern scenes often have many point lights. But when rendering scenes, calculating lighting for each light, for each rendered fragment rapidly becomes prohibitively expensive as the number of lights in the scene increases. [Clustered Forward Rendering](http://www.aortiz.me/2018/12/21/CG.html) is a popular approach that increases the number of lights you can have in a scene by dividing up the view frustum into "clusters" (a grid of sub-volumes). Each cluster is then assigned lights based on whether or not they can affect that cluster. This is a form of "culling" that enables fragments to ignore lights that aren't assigned to their cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modern scenes often have many point lights. But when rendering scenes, calculating lighting for each light, for each rendered fragment rapidly becomes prohibitively expensive as the number of lights in the scene increases. [Clustered Forward Rendering](http://www.aortiz.me/2018/12/21/CG.html) is a popular approach that increases the number of lights you can have in a scene by dividing up the view frustum into "clusters" (a 3d grid of sub-volumes). Each cluster is then assigned lights based on whether or not they can affect that cluster. This is a form of "culling" that enables fragments to ignore lights that aren't assigned to their cluster.
```

> Modern scenes often have many point lights. But when rendering scenes, calculating lighting for each light, for each rendered fragment rapidly becomes prohibitively expensive as the number of lights in the scene increases. [Clustered Forward Rendering](http://www.aortiz.me/2018/12/21/CG.html) is a popular approach that increases the number of lights you can have in a scene by dividing up the view frustum into "clusters" (a 3d grid of sub-volumes). Each cluster is then assigned lights based on whether or not they can affect that cluster. This is a form of "culling" that enables fragments to ignore lights that aren't assigned to their cluster.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
Modern scenes often have many point lights. But when rendering scenes, calculating lighting for each light, for each rendered fragment rapidly becomes prohibitively expensive as the number of lights in the scene increases. [Clustered Forward Rendering](http://www.aortiz.me/2018/12/21/CG.html) is a popular approach that increases the number of lights you can have in a scene by dividing up the view frustum into "clusters" (a 3d grid of sub-volumes). Each cluster is assigned lights based on whether they can affect that cluster. This is a form of "culling" that enables fragments to ignore lights that aren't assigned to their cluster.
```

In practice this can significantly increase the number of lights in the scene:

![clustered forward rendering](clustered_forward_rendering.png)

> Clusters are "3d" slices of the view frustum, but when debugging them in screen space they look like squares (which extend "in" to the screen):

Reviewer 2: Maybe this is too complicated, but I don't like "3d slices". I'm trying to communicate the idea of them being sub-frusta in a simple way without being incorrect.
```suggestion
Clusters are 3d subdivisions of the view frustum. They are cuboids in projected space so for a perspective projection, they are stretched and skewed in view space. When debugging them in screen space, you are looking along a row of clusters and so they look like squares. Different colors within a square represent mesh surfaces being at different depths in the scene and so they belong to different clusters:
```

![bevymark](bevymark.png)

My machine: Nvidia GTX 1070, Intel i7 7700k, 16GB ram, Arch Linux

### Sprite Ergonomics

Sprite entities are now simpler to spawn:

```rust
fn spawn_sprite(mut commands: Commands, asset_server: Res<AssetServer>) {
    commands.spawn_bundle(SpriteBundle {
        texture: asset_server.load("player.png"),
        ..Default::default()
    });
}
```

No need to manage sprite materials! Their texture handle is now a direct component and color can now be set directly on the {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_sprite" version="0.6.0" name="Sprite")}} component.

<details>
    <summary>To compare, expand this to see the old Bevy 0.5 code</summary>

```rust
// Old (Bevy 0.5)
fn spawn_sprite(
    mut commands: Commands,
    asset_server: Res<AssetServer>,
    mut materials: ResMut<Assets<ColorMaterial>>,
) {
    let texture_handle = asset_server.load("player.png");
    commands.spawn_bundle(SpriteBundle {
        material: materials.add(texture_handle.into()),
        ..Default::default()
    });
}
```

</details>

### WGSL Shaders

> Bevy now uses [WGSL](https://www.w3.org/TR/WGSL/) for our built-in shaders and examples. WGSL is a new shader language being developed for WebGPU (although it is a "cross platform" shader language just like GLSL). Bevy still supports GLSL shaders, but WGSL is nice enough that, for now, we are treating it as our "officially recommended" shader language. WGSL is still being developed and polished, but given how much investment it is receiving I believe it is worth betting on. Consider this the start of the "official Bevy shader language" conversation, not the end of it.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
Bevy now uses [WGSL](https://www.w3.org/TR/WGSL/) for our built-in shaders and examples. WGSL is a new shader language for WebGPU (although it is a "cross platform" shader language just like GLSL). Bevy still supports GLSL shaders, but WGSL is nice enough that, for now, we are treating it as our "officially recommended" shader language. WGSL is still being developed and polished, but given how much investment it is receiving I believe it is worth betting on. Consider this the start of the "official Bevy shader language" conversation, not the end of it.
```

Author: I think `being developed` helps capture the "this is still a work in progress" and "this isn't _just_ for WebGPU" ideas, so I think I'll leave this as-is.

Reviewer 16: That's a fair point. I just suggested this because it makes it easier to read and the sentence after the next is all about WGSL still being developed.

    out.clip_position = view.view_proj * world_position;
    return out;
}
```

We also plan to experiment with using Naga for "partial imports" of specific, named symbols (ex: import a specific function or struct from a file). It's a 'far out' idea, but this could also enable using Naga's intermediate shader representation as a way of combining pieces of shader code written in different languages into one shader.

### Pipeline Specialization

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart</div>

When shaders use a preprocessor and have multiple permutations, the associated "render pipeline" needs to be updated to accommodate those permutations (ex: different Vertex Attributes, Bind Groups, etc). To make this process straightforward, we added the SpecializedPipeline trait, which allows defining specializations for a given key:

```rust
impl SpecializedPipeline for MyPipeline {
    type Key = MyPipelineKey;
    // The key here is specified for entities when queuing them up in a RenderPhase
    fn specialize(&self, key: Self::Key) -> RenderPipelineDescriptor {
        // define a specialized pipeline for the given key here
    }
}
```

> Implementors of this trait can then easily and cheaply access specialized pipeline variants (with automatic per-key caching and hot-reloading). If this feels too abstract / advanced, don't worry! This is a "mid level power-user tool", not something most Bevy App developers need to contend with.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implementors of this trait can then easily and cheaply access specialized pipeline variants (with automatic per-key caching and hot-reloading). If this feels too abstract / advanced, don't worry! This is a "mid-level power-user tool", not something most Bevy App developers need to contend with.
```

```rust
cargo build --target wasm32-unknown-unknown
wasm-bindgen --out-dir OUTPUT_DIR --target web TARGET_DIR
```

The New Bevy Renderer developers prioritized cross-platform compatibility for the initial renderer feature implementation and so had to carefully operate within the limits of WebGL2 (ex: storage buffers and compute shaders aren't supported in WebGL2), but the results were worth it! Over time, features will be implemented that leverage more modern/advanced features such as compute shaders. But it is important to us that everyone has access to a solid visual experience for their games and applications regardless of their target platform(s).

You can try out Bevy's WASM support in your browser using our new [Bevy Examples](/examples) page:

[![wasm bevy examples](bevy_examples_wasm.png)](/examples)

### Infinite Reverse Z Perspective Projection

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

> For improved precision in the "useful range", the industry has largely adopted "reverse projections" with an "infinite" far plane. The new Bevy renderer was adapted to use the "right handed infinite reverse z" projection. [This Nvidia article](https://developer.nvidia.com/content/depth-precision-visualized) does a great job of explaining why this is so worthwhile. 

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
For improved precision in the "useful range", the industry has largely adopted "reverse projections" with an "infinite" far plane. The new Bevy renderer was adapted to use the "right-handed infinite reverse z" projection. [This Nvidia article](https://developer.nvidia.com/content/depth-precision-visualized) does a great job of explaining why this is so worthwhile. 
```

### Compute Shaders

The new renderer makes it possible for users to write compute shaders. Our new ["compute shader game of life" example](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.6.0/examples/shader/compute_shader_game_of_life.rs) (by @jakobhellermann) illustrates how to write compute shaders in Bevy.

![compute game of life](compute.png)

### New Multiple Windows Example

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @DJMcNab</div>

> The "multiple windows" example has been updated to use the new renderer APIs. Thanks to the new renderer APIs, this example is now [much nicer to look at](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.6.0/examples/window/multiple_windows.rs) (and will look even nicer when we add high level Render Targets).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The "multiple windows" example has been updated to use the new renderer APIs. Thanks to the new renderer APIs, this example is now [much nicer to look at](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.6.0/examples/window/multiple_windows.rs) (and will look even nicer when we add high-level Render Targets).
```

![multiple windows](multiple_windows.png)

### Crevice

> <div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @mockersf, Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should also credit ElectronicRU for the sized arrays PR? https://github.com/LPGhatguy/crevice/pull/27

Reviewer 2: Oh, you did already below.

```rust
// pure bliss!
App::new()
    .add_plugins(DefaultPlugins)
    .add_system(gravity)
    .run();
```

### The New Component Trait and #[derive(Component)]

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Frizi</div>

In **Bevy 0.6** types no longer implement the {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_ecs" version="0.6.0" name="Component")}} trait by default. Before you get angry ... stick with me for a second. I promise this is for the best! In past Bevy versions, we got away with "auto implementing" {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_ecs" version="0.6.0" name="Component")}} for types using this "blanket impl":

```rust
impl<T: Send + Sync + 'static> Component for T {}
```

This removed the need for users to manually implement {{rust_type(type="trait" crate="bevy_ecs" version="0.6.0" name="Component")}} for their types. Early on this seemed like an ergonomics win with no downsides. But Bevy ECS, our understanding of the problem space, and our plans for the future have changed a lot since then:

> * **It turns out _not everything_ should be a Component**: Our users _constantly_ accidentally add non-component types as components (newbies accidentally adding Bundles and type constructors as Components are our most common `#help` channel threads on [our Discord](https://discord.gg/bevy)). This class of error is very hard to debug because things just silently "don't work". When not everything is a Component, rustc can properly yell at you with informative errors when you mess up.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
* **It turns out _not everything_ should be a Component**: Our users _constantly_ accidentally add non-component types as components. New users accidentally adding Bundles and type constructors as Components are our most common `#help` channel threads on [our Discord](https://discord.gg/bevy). This class of error is very hard to debug because things just silently "don't work". When not everything is a Component, rustc can properly yell at you with informative errors when you mess up.
```

// Points forward from the transform
let forward: Vec4 = transform.forward();
// Points back from the transform
let back: Vec4 = transform.back();
```

### Transform Builder Methods

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Lythenas</div>

Transforms now have helpful `with_translation()`, `with_rotation()`, and `with_scale()` builder methods:

```rust
Transform::from_xyz(0.0, 0.0, 10.0).with_scale(Vec3::splat(2.0))
```

## Rust 2021

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf, @YohDeadfall</div>

Bevy has been updated to use Rust 2021. This means we can take advantage of the new Cargo feature resolver by default (which both Bevy and the new wgpu version require). Make sure you update your crates to Rust 2021 or you will need to manually enable the new feature resolver with `resolver = "2" in your Cargo.toml.

```toml
[package]
name = "your_app"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"
```

Note that "virtual Cargo workspaces" still need to manually define `resolver = "2"`, even in Rust 2021. [Refer to the Rust 2021 documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/edition-guide/rust-2021/default-cargo-resolver.html#details) for details. 

```toml
[workspace]

> resolver = "2" # Important! WGPU/Bevy needs this!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
resolver = "2" # Important! wgpu/Bevy needs this!
```

```rust
fn system(gamepads: Res<Gamepads>) {
    // iterates every active game pad
    for gamepad in gamepads.iter() {
    }
}
```

### Input "any" variants 

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @DJMcNab</div>

`Input` collections now have an `any_pressed()` function, which returns true when any of the given inputs are pressed. 

```rust
 fn system(input: Res<Input<KeyCode>>) {
    if input.any_pressed([KeyCode::LShift, KeyCode::RShift]) {
        println!("one or both of the two shift keys are pressed");
    }
 }
```

## Profiling

### More Spans

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @mockersf, @hymm</div>

The new renderer now has tracing spans for frames, the render app schedule, and the Render Graph (with named Sub Graphs spans). The system executor now has finer grained spans, filling in most of the remaining blanks. Applying System Commands also now has spans.

(ignore those weird characters in the spans ... we're [investigating](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/3563) that)

![render app profiling](render_app_profiling.png)

### Tracy Backend

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

> We now have built in support for the [tracy](https://github.com/wolfpld/tracy) profiler via the `trace_tracy` Cargo feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We now have built-in support for the [tracy](https://github.com/wolfpld/tracy) profiler via the `trace_tracy` Cargo feature.
```

> We now have built-in support for the [tracy](https://github.com/wolfpld/tracy) profiler via the `trace_tracy` Cargo feature.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
Bevy now supports the [tracy](https://github.com/wolfpld/tracy) profiler via the `trace_tracy` Cargo feature.
```

![tracy](tracy.png)

### FromReflect Trait and Derive

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Davier</div>

Types can now derive the new `FromReflect` trait, which enables creating "clones" of a type using arbitrary `Reflect` impls. This is currently used to make reflected collection types (like `Vec`) work properly, but it will also be useful for "round trip" conversions to and from `Reflect` types.

```rust
#[derive(Reflect, FromReflect)]
struct Foo {
    bar: usize,
}

let foo = Foo::from_reflect(&dyn some_reflected_value).unwrap(); 
```

## Bevy Error Codes

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf, @NiklasEi</div>

To make it easier to search for and discuss common Bevy errors, we decided to add a formal [error codes system](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/tree/main/errors), much like the one [that rustc uses](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/tree/master/compiler/rustc_error_codes/src/error_codes);

Error codes and their descriptions also have an automatically-generated [page on the Bevy website](/learn/errors/).

## Bevy Assets

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf</div>

> The curated awesome-bevy Github repo containing a list of Bevy plugins, crates, apps, and learning resources is now reborn as [Bevy Assets](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy-assets)! 

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
The curated awesome-bevy GitHub repo containing a list of Bevy plugins, crates, apps, and learning resources is now reborn as [Bevy Assets](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy-assets)! 
```

Bevy Assets introduces:

* A structured toml format
* Asset icons
* [bevy-website integration](/assets)

> This is just the beginning! We have plans to integrate with [crates.io](http://crates.io) and github, improve indexing / tagging / searchability, add asset-specific pages, prettier styles, content delivery, and more. Ultimately we want this to grow into something that can enable first class, modern asset-driven workflows.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
This is just the beginning! We have plans to integrate with [crates.io](http://crates.io) and GitHub, improve indexing / tagging / searchability, add asset-specific pages, prettier styles, content delivery, and more. Ultimately we want this to grow into something that can enable first-class, modern asset-driven workflows.
```

## Dual MIT / Apache-2.0 License

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @DJMcNab</div>

Thanks to the relevant contributors ([all 246 of them](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/2373)), Bevy is now dual licensed under MIT _and_ Apache-2.0, at the developers' option. This means developers have the flexibility to choose the license that best suits their specific needs. I want to stress that this is now _less_ restrictive than MIT-only, not more.

I originally chose to license Bevy exclusively under MIT for a variety of reasons:

* People and companies generally know and trust the MIT license more than any other license. Apache 2.0 is less known and trusted.
* It is short and easy to understand
* Many people aren't familiar with the "multiple license options ... choose your favorite" approach. I didn't want to scare people away unnecessarily.
* Other open source engines like Godot have had a lot of success with MIT-only licensing

> However there were a variety of issues that have come up that make dual-licensing Bevy under both MIT and Apache-2.0 compelling:

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
However, there were a variety of issues that have come up that make dual-licensing Bevy under both MIT and Apache-2.0 compelling:
```

* The MIT license (arguably) requires binaries to reproduce countless copies of the same license boilerplate for every MIT library in use. Apache-2.0 allows us to compress the boilerplate into a single instance of the license.
* The Apache-2.0 license has protections from patent trolls and an explicit contribution licensing clause.
* The Rust ecosystem is largely Apache-2.0. Being available under that license is good for interoperation and opens the doors to upstreaming Bevy code into other projects (Rust, the async ecosystem, etc).
* The Apache license is incompatible with GPLv2, but MIT is compatible. 

## Bevy Org Changes

### More pull request mergers!

> I've been at my scalability limits for awhile. It has been  * cough * ... challenging  ... to build the engine features I need to, review every single pull request quickly, and preserve my mental health. I've made it this far ... sometimes by overworking myself and sometimes by letting PRs sit unmerged for longer than I'd like. By scaling out, we can have our cake and eat it too!

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
I've been at my scalability limits for a while. It has been  * cough * ... challenging  ... to build the engine features I need to, review every single pull request quickly, and preserve my mental health. I've made it this far ... sometimes by overworking myself and sometimes by letting PRs sit unmerged for longer than I'd like. By scaling out, we can have our cake and eat it too!
```

### Comprehensive CONTRIBUTING.md

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @alice-i-cecile</div>

We now have a relatively complete [Contributors Guide](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md). If you are interested in contributing code or documentation to Bevy, that is a great place to start! 

### CI Build System Improvements

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf, @NathanSWard, @NiklasEi</div>

We made a ton of CI improvements this release:

* We now fail on cargo doc warnings
* We now use [cargo deny](https://github.com/EmbarkStudios/cargo-deny) to protect against vulnerabilities, duplicate dependencies, and invalid licenses
* PRs are now automatically labeled with the `S-Needs-Triage` label
* Ci stability and speed improvements
* We now check that our benchmarks build
* We now assert compiler errors for compile_fail tests, giving us much stricter guarantees
* Examples are now run using lavapipe (instead of swiftshader) for faster CI validation

## What's Next For Bevy?

> Bevy development continues to pick up steam and we have no intention to slow down now! In addition to the [many RFCs](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pulls) we have in the works, we also plan on tackling the following over next few months:

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
Bevy development continues to pick up steam, and we have no intention to slow down now! In addition to the [many RFCs](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pulls) we have in the works, we also plan on tackling the following over the next few months:
```

### The "Train" Release Schedule

In the last two Bevy releases we made massive, sweeping changes to core systems. **Bevy 0.5** was "the one where we rewrote Bevy ECS". **Bevy 0.6** was "the one where we rewrote Bevy Render". These massive reworks took time, and as a result held back a bunch of other useful features and bug fixes. They also created pressure to "crunch" and finish big features quickly to unblock releases. Crunching is unhealthy and should be avoided at all costs!

[The Bevy Community](https://bevyengine.org/community/) has reached relative consensus that we should have a more regular, more predictable release schedule. One where large features can't gum up the system.

> From now on, we will cut releases _approximately_ once every three months (as an upper bound ... sometimes we might release early if it makes sense). After the end of a release cycle, we will start preparing to cut a release. If there are small tweaks that need to be made or "life happens" ... we will happily postpone releases. But we won't hold releases back for "big ticket" items any more.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
From now on, we will cut releases _approximately_ once every three months (as an upper bound ... sometimes we might release early if it makes sense). After the end of a release cycle, we will start preparing to cut a release. If there are small tweaks that need to be made or "life happens" ... we will happily postpone releases. But we won't hold releases back for "big ticket" items anymore.
```

We are balancing a lot of different concerns here:
* Building trust with Bevy contributors that their changes will land in a timely manner
* Building trust with Bevy users that they will receive regular updates and bug fixes
* Giving enough time between releases to cut down on churn in the Bevy Plugin ecosystem (Bevy isn't "stable" yet, but longer releases give reasonable windows of "ecosystem stability") 
* Providing enough content in a release to generate "hype". Bevy release blog posts tend to be a "rallying cry" for the community and I don't want to lose that.
* Establishing proper work / life balance for core developers (crunch is bad!)
    
We will refine this process over time and see what works best.

### More Renderer Features

> * **Post Processing Stack / HDR / Bloom**: HDR and bloom [almost made it into Bevy 0.6](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2876), but we decided to hold them back so we can polish them a bit and build a proper "modular post processing stack".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Post-Processing Stack / HDR / Bloom**: HDR and bloom [almost made it into Bevy 0.6](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2876), but we decided to hold them back so we can polish them a bit and build a proper "modular post-processing stack".
```

* **Skeletal Animation**: Ultimately Bevy will have a general purpose, property based animation system (we already have a [working implementation](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/1429)). We've been holding off on adding skeletal animation, so we can slot it in to that system, but in retrospect that was a mistake. People need skeletal animation _now_. In the short term we will build a scoped 3d skeletal animation system, just to get the ball rolling. Then later we will port it to the general purpose system (whenever that is ready), 

> * **Screen Space Ambient Occlusion (SSAO)**: A popular and straightfoward ambient occlusion approximation that can drastically improve render quality.

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
* **Screen Space Ambient Occlusion (SSAO)**: A popular and straightforward ambient occlusion approximation that can drastically improve render quality.
```
